---
tags:
key_concepts:
parent_directory:
cssclasses: academia
title: 17_11_1945_to_1971A_Linked_ie_Hard_Monetary_System
---

# 17_11_1945_to_1971A_Linked_ie_Hard_Monetary_System
## 1945 TO 1971—

### A LINKED (I.E., HARD)

### MONETARY SYSTEM

I urge you to read this and the following three chapters, which will take you from the beginning of the current monetary, domestic, and international orders in 1945 up to now. I believe we are near the end of these orders and our current Big Cycle. I would be surprised if, after reading these chapters, the rhymes of history don't ring loudly in your ears and you don't feel that you have a good sense of the rhythms of the Big Cycle. With that, we will then be prepared to look ahead.

As explained, World War II ended the prior world order and caused the transition to the world order that we are now in. As always, the biggest winners of the war—in this case, the US, the UK, and their allies, as well as the Soviet Union and its allies—determined the rules of the new world order, including the new world monetary system, though right from the start there was a split between the US and its allies and the Soviet Union and its allies. In 1944, the US, the UK, and their allies created what is called the Bretton Woods system (because it was created in Bretton Woods, New Hampshire). This type of system was a gold-linked (i.e., hard) monetary system. I call this type of monetary system Monetary Policy 0 to signify that it is the first type in a sequence of monetary systems/ approaches to deal with the Big Debt Cycle's evolving conditions.

A Monetary Policy 0 system looks like most prior monetary systems that existed throughout the millennia with "paper" money being linked to the real money (gold), which was held in banks (in this case, central banks). In an MP0 system, currency can be used to buy a designated hard asset (most often gold) at a set price, and because of that ability, the supply of the currency is supposedly limited. That is because if the supply of the currency becomes too large, its price should fall. This is because if there is too much currency relative to the item the currency is backed by (e.g., gold), people will exchange their money for that item, worsening the imbalance between the amount of money and the amount of the hard asset the money is backed by. The fear of this doom loop is intended to limit money creation and therefore support the value of the money. The problem with this system is that it has never worked in the long term because, even with the link to a hard asset, governments still create more money and allow more debt growth than they should, which leads to many more claims on the asset (e.g., gold) than there is money that can be converted into it at the specified price. The consequences of this are almost always a "run on the bank," with people rushing to make the conversion, and the breaking of the promise to deliver the hard asset.

The gold-linked MP0 system set up at Bretton Woods lasted until 1971, during which time dollars, which were then considered like checks with no intrinsic value, were exchangeable for gold, which was considered the real money, at a fixed exchange rate. Other currencies were exchangeable for dollars at agreed-upon and changeable rates. During this 27-year period, there were five short-term debt/economic cycles, which were wiggles around an uptrend in debt relative to incomes during this period. I will now describe how this period unfolded, including what happened with all five of the big forces.

Like all prior monetary systems, the system set up at Bretton Woods had its own particular characteristics. In this case, because the US had about two-thirds of the world's gold, which was held by the

US Treasury, the dollar became the world's reserve currency. Other countries had their own currencies, so to get gold from the US central bank, they had to buy dollars and then use those dollars to buy the gold. Only countries' central banks were allowed to buy gold; individuals were prohibited from buying gold with their paper money. In fact, in the US and most other countries, it was illegal for citizens to own gold because governments wanted people to save in debt assets in order to build the credit system and they didn't want debt assets to have to compete with gold.

This system was created for the United States and the countries that wanted to join it, and the US wanted to let others in. The UK became a subordinate power in this new world order because its financial and other powers were weakened by the war, while the United States became much richer because it entered the war late. The Soviet Union opted out of the Bretton Woods agreement and had its own monetary system and ways of doing things that were independent of the US-dominated system.

The main geopolitical competition was between the US (which was a capitalist democracy) and the Soviet Union (which was a communist autocracy). The United States was much stronger economically and militarily than the Soviet Union, so it was able to provide financial support programs like the Marshall Plan to help rebuild its allies, especially in Europe. These programs were done to enhance alliances, which was especially important at the time of the Cold War. Because the US was rich, had the world's reserve currency, and accounted for about half of world GDP, it could easily afford to provide this support to allies. Having the world's reserve currency, which other countries wanted to save in, gave it great buying power that it eventually abused.

At that time, China, which was allied with the winning powers against the Japanese in the war, was a destroyed and powerless country having suffered what it calls the "Century of Humiliation," in which foreign powers took over different parts of China, conditions deteriorated terribly, and the whole system of government collapsed. This roughly 100-year period began in 1839 and ended with the end of World War II. During this period, Japan took over Taiwan in 1895, which was given back to China by the winning powers at the end of the war. Between 1945 and 1949, China had its version of a classic civil war between the hard-right Kuomintang party and the hard-left Chinese Communist Party. That led to the communists driving the Kuomintang out to Taiwan, Chinese communists siding with Russian communists, and the United States alienating China. At that time, both parties to the civil war agreed that there was only one China and that Taiwan was a part of it, and the argument was over who would control both. Arguments about this issue have festered for a long time and are intensifying, which is especially important because of the powers the US and China possess and because Taiwan is the center of chip production, which today is even more important than oil production was in the last cycle.

In that early post-war period, inventive people, especially American scientists and entrepreneurs who were financed by the capitalists with government support, continued to come up with great new technologies that would eventually have huge effects. For example, in 1956 "artificial intelligence" was invented, and in 1957 the first satellite was launched. In the mid-1950s the technical foundations of the internet were developed. Of course, there were too many inventions that had big economic, political, geopolitical, and environmental effects for me to delve into here.

Because the UK was heavily indebted and in fast relative decline economically and militarily, it rapidly and persistently had its bonds and money devalued in the classic ways that were described earlier and that are important to keep in mind when looking at the US now. Immediately after the war, the UK had a lot of debt, and it had colonies and military bases in over 40 countries that it couldn't afford to maintain. I won't repeat all the steps, but I will point out that this overextended British Empire had debt problems that led to a managed  $30\%$  devaluation of its currency in 1949, which was followed by a series of devaluations in the years that followed, all to relieve its debt burdens at great cost to its debt holders. The decline in the value of the currency and debt was classic. There were debt payment problems and the inevitable losses of the controlled foreign territories that made it obvious to the world that the UK was declining, which reinforced the desire not to hold its debt and currency and led to their further declines. Most obviously, when Egypt took over the Suez Canal in 1956, loyal holders of UK bonds sold them. In 1967, another financial crisis led to another major devaluation and abandonment of its debt/money being held as a store of wealth, and in 1976 the UK's financial condition got so bad that it had to go to the IMF for financial help. The decline of the British pound and the British Empire is the most recent classic case study of the decline of a reserve currency and is described at length in my book Principles for Dealing with the Changing World Order.

In the early 1960s, the US short-term money and credit cycle was expansionary, which was great for the US markets and economy until 1965-66 when inflation rose to $3.8\%$ and the Fed tightened monetary policy, inverting the yield curve for the first time since 1929. These events produced, in 1968, what would be the peak inflation-adjusted price in the S&P 500 for the next 25 years, with that long period of bad performance due to the Big Cycle influences I described earlier in this study. It also led to a recession in 1969-70. That long period of terrible stock and bond market performance and terrific gold and other inflation-hedge asset performance was primarily due to the needed creation and devaluation of money to deal with the debts (i.e., the debtors' obligations to deliver money) being too large relative to the actual amount of real money in existence. That paradigm taught me a lot about the need to be able to make money in all types of market environments and the skills required to do it. It also puts me today in a very different mindset from most investors who haven't been through something like that and have views based just on their experiences and so think that being long only in equity-like assets and ignoring the Big Cycles is the best way to invest.

In the 1960s, there were also some nail-biting political and geopolitical conflicts that made a big impression on me, most notably when the Cuban Missile Crisis in 1962 brought the world's two most powerful countries to the brink of nuclear war. I was 13 at the time and vividly remember watching John F. Kennedy's address to the country explaining the situation and wondering if there would be nuclear war or which country would back down. I was sure the potential for geopolitical catastrophe would have a big impact on the markets, but over the next few days the stock market didn't behave nearly as badly as I thought it would have. What happened was that the Soviet Union pulled its missiles that were aimed at the US out of Cuba, and the United States pulled its missiles that were aimed at the Soviet Union out of Turkey. This allowed both countries to claim victory without telling their people about the concessions they made.

This episode also gave me my first lesson about how brinkmanship diplomacy really works and how markets behave during such dramas (when the damages that would result from the conflict are unacceptably high). In November 1963, JFK was assassinated, which also had only a brief passing effect on the markets and economy; then came the civil rights movement, and big spending on "guns" (the Vietnam War) and "butter" (US domestic social programs). The fact that these and numerous other seemingly earthshaking events didn't have much effect on markets helped me to realize why they didn't affect the markets more and to sort out what really matters and doesn't matter to market prices and the economy. While I won't delve into all that matters, I will tell you that what matters to markets is the money that investments earn, so big political events like threats of war don't matter much until they start to affect those cash flows. That is why, from an investment perspective, I don't worry about the headline-grabbing events of today, and I suggest that you do the same. Also, I learned that most of these global threats turn out to sound more threatening than they actually are because most countries' leaders will step back from the brink rather than choose to go over it. However, to be clear, there are times when international conflicts have impacts, such as on supply chains and the value of currencies, and there are rare occasions when leaders don't step back and things do blow up, so that these conflicts become very consequential. Because I view protecting myself against these events as being like buying insurance to be protected against an improbable, unacceptable loss, I look for ways to be insured against them even though I don't expect them to happen.

In the 1960s, there was also a big geopolitical swing in the relationship between China and the Soviet Union. They changed from being "friendly" countries to becoming "enemy" countries, which led to a corresponding big geopolitical swing between China and the United States from being "enemies" to being "friends." That led to Henry Kissinger's secret visit to China in 1971 and then President Nixon's visit in early 1972, which set the stage for China's opening up after Mao Zedong died in 1976. These developments, like the earlier-mentioned technology developments, were like small seeds of change being planted that grew into enormous changes that would affect all five forces everywhere. They mattered a lot even though they didn't seem to matter much at the time.

During this 1945-71 period, the US overspent and financed that overspending by borrowing, especially in the 1960s on the Vietnam War and the "war on poverty," so its paper-money promises to give real money (gold) far exceeded what it had in its central bank. That mattered a lot, though it didn't seem to at the time because the bad finances grew slowly until they led to the blowup. You see, early in the 1950s and 1960s, most countries were happy to accept these "paper" dollars in return for their goods and services because they wanted to accumulate dollars as savings. As a result, the US could overspend liberally. Also over those years, other countries, especially Germany and Japan, gradually recovered from their big losses from the war and became competitive economically, which led the US balance of payments to worsen. In the late 1960s, one could see the US and the UK having runs on their central banks because holders of paper money turned it in to get the real money (gold), so the US central bank's reserves of gold steadily declined.

You might recall the following principle: $\odot$ During times when

There is too much debt relative to the quantity of money that is needed to service debts. The need to either increase the amount of money that exists and/or cut the amount of debt there is leads governments to break their promises and do some combination of a) raising the amount of money and credit, b) reducing the amount of debt (e.g., by restructuring it), and/or c) preventing the free-market ownership and movement of the hard money (e.g., gold). At such times, there is a run away from bad money to good money that the government wants to stop. This often leads to prohibiting good money from being freely held and freely moved.

Seeing the US central bank running out of real money (gold), Charles de Gaulle, the French president at the time, openly called for a reform of the monetary system in 1965. Other holders of paper dollars caught on, and the run accelerated. The US spending and deficits didn't slow down, so the run on the US central bank ended like most such central bank runs end. For previously described reasons, the selling of the debt drove interest rates up and the currency down at the same time as the economy weakened. The US central bank did not have enough real money (gold) in the bank to meet its obligations to exchange it for the paper money at the promised price.

On the night of Sunday, August 15, 1971, President Nixon went on television and announced that the United States was no longer going to allow dollar holders to turn their dollars in for gold. That ended the monetary system, and money, as we knew it. It immediately devalued money, raised inflation, and made it much easier to pay debts for the reasons I previously explained. I was clerking on the floor of the New York Stock Exchange at the time. It was a summer job between college and business school. I figured that ending the monetary system as we knew it and preventing people from getting the real money was a big, bad deal, so I expected the stock market to be down a lot. Instead, that Monday was the best day for the market that year—stocks were up more than $3\%$.

Because I had never experienced a currency devaluation before, I was ignorant about how they work. That led me to study history, which led me to find out that, in 1933, President Roosevelt had done the exact same thing (default on the promise to allow people with dollars to exchange them for gold at the promised exchange rate) for the exact same reason (the US had created more promises for gold than it had in gold, and it was running out of gold and money during a bank run), which had the exact same effect (the devaluation, big market rallies in stocks and gold). The only real difference from Nixon was that Roosevelt made the announcement on the radio, not television, which wasn't common yet.

In both cases, de-linking the currency meant the central government didn't have to deliver the real money, and it freed central bankers to create a lot of money and credit. This made it easier to handle the debts and stimulate the economy, leading equity, gold, and commodity prices to rise and the economy to pick up. That's when I learned that when central banks create a lot of money and credit, the value of money and credit goes down and the price of most things goes up. I realized that these moves were classic cases of "hard" currency (gold-linked) exchange rate systems breaking down, leading to the devaluations of the money and debt. Once I saw this happen in these two cases, I saw that it happened throughout history in almost all such cases, and I learned the principle that  $\bullet$  when there is a big debt problem that is intolerably painful, central banks will "print money" and distribute it to make it easier for debtors to pay their debts, which will devalue the money and debt relative to other assets. That helped me make a lot of money and avoid a lot of painful losses.

### CHAPTER 12