---
title: Business Cycles: Introduction, Characteristics, and History
parent_directory: ECON Economic Stabilization
formatted: 2025-12-21 07:00:00 AM
formatter_model: grok-code-fast-1
cli_tool: opencode
primary_tags:
  - business cycles
  - macroeconomic fluctuations
  - recession
  - expansion
  - economic volatility
secondary_tags:
  - NBER
  - comovement
  - persistence
  - leading indicators
  - lagging indicators
  - great moderation
  - cyclical behavior
  - turning points
  - aggregate economic activity
cssclasses: academia
---

# Business Cycles: Introduction, Characteristics, and History

# Introduction

Although the U.S. economy has exhibited growth in real GDP of about  $3\%$  per year on average over the 75 years since World War II, fluctuations in economic activity around the trend are common. Indeed, fluctuations continuously occur not only for entire economies but for individuals and industries as well.

For example, in the case of individuals, economic activity fluctuates between night and day and between periods of employment and non-employment.

In the case of industries, economic activity fluctuates

(i) with the seasons: for example, construction activity slows during winter months and the education industry scales way back during the summer months

(ii) with shifts in underlying industry supply and demand factors: for example, increased oil prices raise an input price of certain manufacturers leading to production cutbacks; fear of getting seriously ill by going out to stores during the early stages of the COVID pandemic greatly reduced demand for products sold at retailers.

In the case of the entire economy, there are recessions and expansions--i.e., business cycles. These are associated with fluctuations in aggregate output, income, and employment and even can influence political election outcomes. We will focus primarily on macroeconomic fluctuations in this course.

But do people care about fluctuations in economic activity and in well-being or utility? People buy private health, auto, and home insurance and thus reveal that they do not like negative fluctuations (such as bad health, auto accidents, and house fires) in their wellbeing. They also do not like fluctuations both in the downward and upward directions. Indeed, people pay to get advice and training to prevent their weight from increasing or decreasing by much. Also, people pay to avoid the impact on well-being of large swings in temperature by installing heating/cooling systems in their houses or by buying different wardrobes for summer and winter. This leads to the question--examined in module 3--of how much people would pay to avoid the effects of business cycle fluctuations in income, employment, and consumption (and hence, utility). If they would pay a lot, and given that private insurance against macroeconomic fluctuations generally is unavailable, then there may well be a role for macroeconomic fiscal and monetary policies to help stabilize the economy. One would hope that there is strong justification given an abundance of empirical evidence that U.S. monetary and fiscal policies each in fact respond vigorously to macroeconomic fluctuations.

# Business Cycle Characteristics

In 1959, Arthur Burns—former chairman of the Federal Reserve Board and a towering figure in the analysis of business cycles—predicted, if not the end of business cycles in the United States, at least that "the business cycle is unlikely to be as disturbing or

troublesome to our children as it once was to our fathers." How has his prediction turned out? And for that matter, what exactly is a business cycle? We examine these issues.

# Definition:

Business cycles are a type of fluctuation found in the aggregate economic activity of nations. A cycle consists of expansions occurring at about the same time in many economic activities, followed by similarly general recessions, contractions, and revivals which merge into the expansion phase of the next cycle; this sequence of changes is recurrent but not periodic; in duration business cycles vary from more than 1 year to ten or twelve years. (Arthur Burns and Wesley Mitchell, Measuring Business Cycles, 1946)

Aggregate economic activity. Cycles are defined broadly as fluctuations in "aggregate economic activity" rather than as fluctuations in a single variable, although the single variable, real GDP, usually is the main focus of attention.

Expansions and contractions. Start by thinking of a business cycle as a sine wave with an upward slope reflecting underlying growth in the economy (we will relax the idea of the cycle being a sine wave--i.e., being periodic--shortly). The period of time during which aggregate economic activity is falling significantly across a broad segment of the economy is a contraction or recession.

After reaching the low point of the contraction, the trough (T), activity begins to increase. The period of time during which activity grows is an expansion or a boom. After reaching the high point of the expansion, the peak (P), activity begins to decline. The entire sequence measured from peak to peak or from trough to trough is a business cycle. This suggests that cycles are temporary deviations from the economy's normal growth path.

Peaks and troughs are known as turning points. There is no simple formula that tells us when a peak or trough has been reached. A conventional definition found in the press—that a recession has occurred when there are two consecutive quarters of negative real GDP growth—is not widely accepted by economists because real GDP is only one of many possible indicators of aggregate activity. The NBER Business Cycle Dating Committee retrospectively determines the "official" dating of peaks and troughs. They consider both the depth of the decline in economic activity as well as its duration. Real GDP (and the corresponding income side measure, Gross Domestic Income) is the most important piece of data but the NBER also makes use of data on real personal income (less transfers), payroll and household measures of employment, aggregate hours of work, industrial production, and real manufacturing wholesale and retail sales.

The recession resulting from the financial crisis in 2008 illustrates the difficulty of choosing business-cycle turning points. The various key data series all reached peaks at some time between late 2007 and mid-2008. For example, GDP rose in 2007:Q4, fell in 2008:Q1, rose in 2008:Q2 and then declined for the next four quarters; so when did the recession begin? (The situation is complicated by the fact that GDP data are revised frequently; indeed, GDP declined in 2007:Q4 using preliminary estimates.)

BUSINESS CYCLE REFERENCE DATES  

<table><tr><td>Peak</td><td>Trough</td><td>Contraction</td><td>Expansion</td><td colspan="2">Cycle</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">Quarterly dates are in parentheses</td><td>Peak to Trough</td><td>Previous trough to this peak</td><td>Trough from Previous Trough</td><td>Peak from Previous Peak</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>December 1854 (IV)</td><td>--</td><td>--</td><td>--</td><td>--</td></tr><tr><td>June 1857(II)</td><td>December 1858 (IV)</td><td>18</td><td>30</td><td>48</td><td>--</td></tr><tr><td>October 1860(III)</td><td>June 1861 (III)</td><td>8</td><td>22</td><td>30</td><td>40</td></tr><tr><td>April 1865(I)</td><td>December 1867 (I)</td><td>32</td><td>46</td><td>78</td><td>54</td></tr><tr><td>June 1869(II)</td><td>December 1870 (IV)</td><td>18</td><td>18</td><td>36</td><td>50</td></tr><tr><td>October 1873(III)</td><td>March 1879 (I)</td><td>65</td><td>34</td><td>99</td><td>52</td></tr><tr><td>March 1882(I)</td><td>May 1885 (II)</td><td>38</td><td>36</td><td>74</td><td>101</td></tr><tr><td>March 1887(II)</td><td>April 1888 (I)</td><td>13</td><td>22</td><td>35</td><td>60</td></tr><tr><td>July 1890(III)</td><td>May 1891 (II)</td><td>10</td><td>27</td><td>37</td><td>40</td></tr><tr><td>January 1893(I)</td><td>June 1894 (II)</td><td>17</td><td>20</td><td>37</td><td>30</td></tr><tr><td>December 1895(IV)</td><td>June 1897 (II)</td><td>18</td><td>18</td><td>36</td><td>35</td></tr><tr><td>June 1899(III)</td><td>December 1900 (IV)</td><td>18</td><td>24</td><td>42</td><td>42</td></tr><tr><td>September 1902(IV)</td><td>August 1904 (III)</td><td>23</td><td>21</td><td>44</td><td>39</td></tr><tr><td>May 1907(II)</td><td>June 1908 (II)</td><td>13</td><td>33</td><td>46</td><td>56</td></tr><tr><td>January 1910(I)</td><td>January 1912 (IV)</td><td>24</td><td>19</td><td>43</td><td>32</td></tr><tr><td>January 1913(I)</td><td>December 1914 (IV)</td><td>23</td><td>12</td><td>35</td><td>36</td></tr><tr><td>August 1918(III)</td><td>March 1919 (I)</td><td>7</td><td>44</td><td>51</td><td>67</td></tr><tr><td>January 1920(I)</td><td>July 1921 (III)</td><td>18</td><td>10</td><td>28</td><td>17</td></tr><tr><td>May 1923(II)</td><td>July 1924 (III)</td><td>14</td><td>22</td><td>36</td><td>40</td></tr><tr><td>October 1926(III)</td><td>November 1927 (IV)</td><td>13</td><td>27</td><td>40</td><td>41</td></tr><tr><td>August 1929(III)</td><td>March 1933 (I)</td><td>43</td><td>21</td><td>64</td><td>34</td></tr><tr><td>May 1937(II)</td><td>June 1938 (II)</td><td>13</td><td>50</td><td>63</td><td>93</td></tr><tr><td>February 1945(I)</td><td>October 1945 (IV)</td><td>8</td><td>80</td><td>88</td><td>93</td></tr><tr><td>November 1948(IV)</td><td>October 1949 (IV)</td><td>11</td><td>37</td><td>48</td><td>45</td></tr><tr><td>July 1953(II)</td><td>May 1954 (II)</td><td>10</td><td>45</td><td>55</td><td>56</td></tr><tr><td>August 1957(III)</td><td>April 1958 (II)</td><td>8</td><td>39</td><td>47</td><td>49</td></tr><tr><td>April 1960(II)</td><td>February 1961 (I)</td><td>10</td><td>24</td><td>34</td><td>32</td></tr><tr><td>December 1969(IV)</td><td>November 1970 (IV)</td><td>11</td><td>106</td><td>117</td><td>116</td></tr><tr><td>November 1973(IV)</td><td>March 1975 (I)</td><td>16</td><td>36</td><td>52</td><td>47</td></tr><tr><td>January 1980(I)</td><td>July 1980 (III)</td><td>6</td><td>58</td><td>64</td><td>74</td></tr><tr><td>July 1981(III)</td><td>November 1982 (IV)</td><td>16</td><td>12</td><td>28</td><td>18</td></tr><tr><td>July 1990(III)</td><td>March 1991(I)</td><td>8</td><td>92</td><td>100</td><td>108</td></tr><tr><td>March 2001(I)</td><td>November 2001 (IV)</td><td>8</td><td>120</td><td>128</td><td>128</td></tr><tr><td>December 2007 (IV)</td><td>June 2009 (II)</td><td>18</td><td>73</td><td>91</td><td>81</td></tr><tr><td>Feb. 2020 (2019 IV)</td><td>April 2020 (II)</td><td>2</td><td>128</td><td>130</td><td>146</td></tr><tr><td colspan="6">Average, all cycles:</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">1854-2009 (34cycles)</td><td>18</td><td>39</td><td>56</td><td>56</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">1854-1919 (16 cycles)</td><td>22</td><td>27</td><td>48</td><td>49</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">1919-1945 (6 cycles)</td><td>18</td><td>35</td><td>53</td><td>53</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">1945-2020 (13 cycles)</td><td>10</td><td>64</td><td>70</td><td>75</td></tr></table>

Source: NBER

The conflicting signals at the end of the expansion phase made it difficult for the NBER to select the December 2007 starting date for the recession (for example, employment rose in December). This experience is typical and so generally the NBER has to make a judgment as to the peak and trough months (quarters) of the business cycle. Similarly, choosing the date of the recession trough (and thus the date for the start of the cyclical expansion) involves judgment; based on various pieces of data—including the rise in real GDP after mid-2009—the NBER decided in late September 2010 that the recession trough occurred in June 2009 even though the job and housing markets were weak at that time.

Dates for the corona-virus recession--officially beginning in February 2020 and ending in April 2020--seemed like an easier decision for the NBER. Real GDP declined  $5\%$  in 2020 Q1 and then  $31\%$  in the second quarter (both at annual rates), before rising in the second half of the year. For the year as a whole, real GDP declined  $3.5\%$  from its level in 2019. The official unemployment rate peaked at  $15\%$  in April 2020 (and alternative measures rose to even higher levels). Both official measures of employment fell sharply over the two month recession before rising rapidly.

If a recession is severe enough, it becomes a depression. Although there is no "official" definition of a depression, some economists have loosely defined it as a downturn of three years or more with at least a 10 percent drop in output and an unemployment rate exceeding 10 percent. The 2008-2009 experience does not qualify: the downturn "officially" began in December 2007; between 2007:Q4 and 2009:Q2, real GDP declined about  $4 - 1 / 4\%$  on balance; and the unemployment rate, which peaked at  $10.0\%$  late in 2009.

In terms of employment and output measures, the corona-virus recession qualifies as a depression. However it lasted only 2 months and thus does not meet the length requirement. For sake of reference, the Great Depression during the 1929 to 1933 period experienced a cumulative decline in output of  $27\%$  and an increase in the unemployment rate to a level of  $25\%$ . Although the data are not as complete and accurate in earlier periods, many economic historians consider the period of 1893-1898 to be a depression in the United States. I have not found any estimates of real GDP for that period but the unemployment rate exceeded  $11\%$  in each year during that period. By comparison, real GDP declined  $2.6\%$  during the 1981-82 "deep" recession and  $3.1\%$  during the 1973-75 recession.

Comovement. Cycles do not occur in just a few sectors. Instead, expansions or contractions occur "at about the same time in many economic activities." The tendency of many economic variables to move together in a predictable way over the cycle is called comovement.

Recurrent but not periodic. The business cycle does not occur at regular, predictable intervals and does not last for a fixed length of time (although the seasonal cycle—or economic fluctuations over the seasons of the year—is periodic). Although the business

cycle is not periodic, it is recurrent in the sense that its standard pattern recurs again and again in industrial economies.

Persistence. The duration of a complete business cycle can vary greatly. However, once a recession begins, the economy tends to keep contracting for a period of time (although the 2020 recession lasted only 2 months). Similarly, an expansion, once begun, usually lasts a while. This tendency for declines in activity to be followed by further declines, and for growth to be followed by more growth, is called persistence. Price inflation also is persistent.

NBER's monthly business cycle chronology and summary table (see table above):

The U.S. economy has experienced 34 complete cycles between 1854 and 2021.

Recessions have had many causes over the past 150 years, including oil price hikes, sudden declines in consumer confidence, bursting of asset price bubbles (such as prices of housing and stocks), Fed interest rate hikes (to fight inflation), the corona-virus, and so on. We will model the theoretical impacts of many of these precipitating factors later in the course. For now I want to discuss recessions associated with financial crises since the (bank-centered) financial crisis beginning in 2007 was the most significant economic event since the Great Depression of the 1930s (but prior to the corona-virus pandemic whose impact also has been very large.)

There has been much research done recently about the causes and implications of bank-centered financial crises. As an introduction to the topic, I recommend the important empirical work of Carmen Reinhart and Kenneth Rogoff, This Time is Different (2009). The message of the book is that this time is not different.

In comparing the run-up and aftermath of severe postwar financial crises in advanced economies, the similarities are amazing. For example, on average over the severe crises, output and employment decline significantly following the onset of crises and the decline lasts a long time. The unemployment rate rises about 8 percentage points on average (the rate rose about  $5 - 1 / 2$  percentage points in the U.S.), and this down phase of the business cycle lasts about 6 years. Real GDP falls (from peak to trough) about  $4.5\%$  on average (GDP declined  $4 - 1 / 4\%$  in the United States). Moreover, the recessions surrounding financial crises are about twice as long as normal recessions (during the post war period, the average length of a U.S. recession has been 11 months whereas the 2008-09 recent recession lasted 18 months). Further it takes on average about 4-1/2 years for real GDP per capita to return to its pre-crisis level (it took 6 years to regain its pre-crisis level in the most recent episode). For sake of comparison it took about 10 years during the Great Depression of the 1930s. As bad as the recent financial/economic crisis was--the worst since the Great Depression--related research by Reinhart and Rogoff shows that it has been less severe than many other instances in the history of the United States, even ignoring the Great Depression. For example, the crises of 1893 and 1907 were much more severe (where severity is measured in terms of both depth and duration of the economic downturn).

Specifically, their measure of severity adds the percentage point decline in per capita real GDP (from its peak to trough) to the number of years it takes for per capita real GDP to return to its previous peak level. For example, during the 2007-2009 experience, real per capita GDP declined about 5 percentage points and it took about 6 years for real per capita GDP to return to its previous peak, implying a severity index of 11. By contrast, the severity index was 39 during the U.S. Great Depression of the 1930s. [The corona-virus recession--of course not a financial crisis--was over after two quarters. Real GDP per capita declined about 11 percentage points from 2019 Q4 to 2020Q2 and it took roughly 2 years for real GDP per capita to return to its pre-recession level; this implies a severity index of about 13.]

# Have American business cycles become less severe?

For a long time, economists believed that over the long sweep of history business cycles generally have become less severe in the United States; the comparison was typically between the pre-1929 and post WWII periods (with the "Great Depression" viewed as an outlier). Christina Romer argued that that the seeming transformation was largely an artifact of the dubious quality of pre-1929 data. For example, widely accepted estimates of pre-1929 GNP were based on estimates of just the goods-producing sectors of the economy, while ignoring less-volatile sectors. Romer's original attempt at constructing more meaningful estimates led her to conclude that the difference between pre-WWI and post-WWII volatility was minimal. Economists have used Romer's evidence comparing the pre-WWI and post-WWII periods to call into question the ability to achieve major goals of postwar economic policy, namely the smoothing out of cyclical swings in activity and, in particular, the reduction in the magnitude of recessions.

Romer subsequently relaxed her basic conclusions, although only a bit. She now argues that volatility (both ups and downs in economic activity) and recessions themselves have been damped over time, although "only modestly;" she also recognizes that a trend toward much greater stability may have started in the mid-1980s, a period discussed below. The possibility of a new trend has been called into question by the deep recession from 2007-2009 associated with the bursting of the housing price bubble and the financial crisis and the more recent corona-virus recession in 2020.

Macroeconomic Volatility Comparisons for the United States  

<table><tr><td></td><td>1886-1916</td><td>1920-1940</td><td>1948-1997</td><td>1948-1984</td><td>1985-1997</td></tr><tr><td>Indust. Prod.</td><td>6.2%</td><td>16.0%</td><td>5.0%</td><td>5.7%</td><td>2.2%</td></tr><tr><td>GNP</td><td>3.0%</td><td>7.1%</td><td>2.5% (2.4%)</td><td>2.8%</td><td>1.2% (1.8%)</td></tr><tr><td>Unempl. Rate</td><td>1.4</td><td>n.a.</td><td>1.1</td><td>1.2</td><td>0.6</td></tr></table>

Source: C. Romer, Journal of Economic Perspectives, Spring 1999; annual data.  
Notes: Entries in the first two rows are standard deviations of the annual percent changes in the variable. Entries in the third row are the standard deviations of the first differences in the unemployment rate. [GNP figures in parentheses are updated by me through 2020.]

In any case, Romer estimates, using several measures of economic activity, that volatility in the post-WWII period declined about  $15\%$  relative to the pre-WWI period; see table on macroeconomic volatility above. The estimates also reveal that these two periods were

substantially less volatile than the interwar period, which included the Great Depression. Also, the most recent estimates by Romer show that output loss during recessions is about 6 percent smaller on average in the post WWII period than in the thirty-year period prior to WWII and substantially smaller than in the 1920 to 1940 interwar period; this recent evidence at least raises the possibility that policy has been beneficial.

The literature on the issue of "volatility stabilization" is contentious because, given the lack of prewar (WWI) data, it is difficult to measure prewar U.S. economic aggregates accurately. By contrast, it is easier to address the issue of the relative duration, rather than the relative volatility, of prewar and postwar business cycles. Frank Diebold and Glenn Rudebusch document through formal statistical testing that: the duration of expansions has increased; recessions have become less frequent; and the duration of recessions has declined. For example, they document that the average duration of a pre-WWII expansion is about 25 months, whereas that for postwar expansions is about 50 months, a doubling. The average duration of prewar contractions is about 20 months, whereas that for postwar contractions is 11 months, a halving. In addition, recessions have become less frequent: there were 15 recessions in the 60 years prior to WWI but only 11 recessions over a similar length of time following WWII (and since the mid-1980s there have been only 4 recessions).

Much research (and the table on macroeconomic volatility above) shows that economic volatility declined in the mid-1980s, relative to the 1945-1984 period, and has remained at a lower level since then (of course, the severe turbulence that started in late 2007 and the impact of the corona-virus in 2020 boosted the post-1984 level of volatility); this is true for most advanced economies as well as the United States. This phenomenon has been called the Great Moderation. The quality of the data for this period is not in question, so the decline is genuine. James Stock and Mark Watson (2002) have found that volatility, measured by the standard deviation of a variable, declined by  $20\%$  to  $50\%$  for many of the variables they examined, including a decline of  $33\%$  for real GDP,  $27\%$  for employment, and  $50\%$  for inflation. The reduction seemed to come from a sudden, one-time drop rather than a gradual decline, although this is somewhat controversial in that some economists believe there has been a gradual decline over a long period, interrupted by the relatively high volatility period of the 1950s-1970s.

There is a lot of research on why volatility apparently declined around 1984. Some hypotheses include the switch in production from manufacturing to services, changes in how business firms use inventories, fewer major shocks to oil prices, reduced shocks to commodity prices and food prices, better monetary policy, better financial markets (prior to the recent financial crisis) that make it easier for consumers to smooth consumption and firms to smooth production, an aging workforce (the young experience much more volatility of employment and hours worked than older workers over the business cycle), and good luck. Overall, Stock and Watson found that better monetary policy is responsible for about  $20\%$  to  $30\%$  of the reduction in output volatility, with reduced shocks to the economy's productivity accounting for about  $15\%$ , and reduced shocks to food and commodity prices accounting for another  $15\%$ ; the remainder is attributed to good luck in terms of smaller shocks to the economy. Other economists differ in the

relative weights; more recent evidence points to improved inventory management as a very important factor. However, all explanations have difficulty explaining the apparent sharp drop in volatility around 1984.

# More Business Cycle Facts: Comovements between aggregate economic variables

Robert Lucas has noted that business cycles are all very similar with respect to the qualitative behavior of comovements among data series. We will look at comovements for the post-WWII period in the U.S. To be successful, a theory of the business cycle must explain the cyclical behavior of a wide range of key macro-economic variables. An economic variable that moves in the same direction as aggregate economic activity (up in expansions and down in contractions) is procyclical. A variable that moves in the opposite direction to aggregate activity is countercyclical. Variables that do not display a clear pattern over the business cycle are acyclical. In class, I will discuss several of the co-movements shown in the next table in much more detail.

Cyclical Behavior of Key Variables ("U.S. Business Cycle Facts," post WWII)  

<table><tr><td>Variable</td><td>Direction</td><td>Timing</td></tr><tr><td>Production</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Industrial Production</td><td>Procyclical</td><td>Coincident</td></tr><tr><td>Expenditure</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Consumption</td><td>Procyclical</td><td>Coincident</td></tr><tr><td>Business Fixed Investment</td><td>Procyclical</td><td>Coincident</td></tr><tr><td>Residential Investment</td><td>Procyclical</td><td>Leading</td></tr><tr><td>Inventory investment</td><td>Procyclical</td><td>Leading</td></tr><tr><td>Labor Market</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Employment</td><td>Procyclical</td><td>Coincident?</td></tr><tr><td>Unemployment rate</td><td>Countercyclical</td><td>?</td></tr><tr><td>Average labor productivity</td><td>Procyclical (?)</td><td>Leading</td></tr><tr><td>Real wage</td><td>Procyclical (mildly)</td><td>?</td></tr><tr><td>Money Supply and Inflation</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Money supply, M2</td><td>Procyclical</td><td>Leading</td></tr><tr><td>Inflation</td><td>Procyclical</td><td>Lagging</td></tr><tr><td>Financial Variables</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Stock prices</td><td>Procyclical</td><td>Leading</td></tr><tr><td>Nominal interest rates</td><td>Procyclical</td><td>Lagging</td></tr><tr><td>Real interest rates</td><td>Acyclical</td><td>?</td></tr></table>

A second important characteristic of cyclical behavior is the timing of a variable's turning points relative to the turning points of the business cycle. An economic variable

is a leading variable if it tends to move in advance of aggregate economic activity. That is, the peaks and troughs in a leading variable occur before the corresponding peaks and troughs in the business cycle. A leading variable does not necessarily help forecast the future course of the economy. For example, a downturn in the stock market is not an infallible indicator of an incipient recession. As Paul Samuelson once noted, "Wall Street indexes predicted nine of the last five recessions." A lagging variable is one whose peaks and troughs tend to occur later than the corresponding peaks and troughs in the business cycle. A coincident variable is one whose peaks and troughs occur at about the same time as the corresponding business cycle peaks and troughs.