---
parent_directory:
title: The Southland Corporation (C)
tags:
aliases:
parent_folder: Class 5- Private Information, Liquidity, and Securitization
subfolder:
key_concepts:
cssclasses: academia
linter-yaml-title-alias: The Southland Corporation (C)
---

# The Southland Corporation (C)

In the spring of 1990, Southland Corporation, the owner of 7-Eleven convenience stores, unsuccessfully attempted to resolve its financial distress by restructuring its debt. Three separate exchange offers were made to bondholders over a seven-month period, and each offer failed to obtain sufficient approval from the bondholders.

The final exchange offer involved the infusion of \(430 million by Ito Yokado, 7-Eleven's licensee in Japan, in exchange for \(70\%\) of the equity of Southland. Bondholders would receive a mixture of new debt securities and almost \(22\%\) of the equity. The Thompson family, who obtained \(100\%\) of the equity in Southland's 1987 leveraged buyout, would retain about \(5\%\) of the equity. Across the five public debt issues outstanding, the plan received approval ranging from \(46\%\) to \(90\%\) of the bondholders, far short of the \(95\%\) acceptance rate required by Ito Yokado and Southland's bankers.

The failure to resolve its financial distress by a voluntary debt restructuring was threatening Southland's survival. Its creditors grew nervous, and obtaining normal trade credit became increasingly difficult. As a result, demands for working capital expanded, intensifying its cash flow problems. Southland had to resolve its financial distress quickly, or face bankruptcy.

# Company Background

Southland began as an ice company formed by Joe C. Thompson, Sr., and several partners in 1927. At the suggestion of a dock manager, the Southland Ice Company began selling bread, milk, and eggs in the evening, after other markets had closed. By 1928, 10 of Southland's Tote'm stores sold gasoline. Known as "the little store that had everything," early stores featured curb-side service and open storefronts. In 1946, Southland adopted for all its retail stores the name "7-Eleven," after its hours of operation, 7 a.m. to 11 p.m.

The first 7-Eleven store to open outside of Texas was in Florida, in 1954. Soon after, stores were opened in Virginia and California. In 1961, Joe Thompson, Sr., was succeeded as chairman by his son John, who expanded the chain from 600 stores to more than 11,800 worldwide by 1986. John P. Thompson was Southland's chief executive officer until 1986, when his brother, Jere W. Thompson, president of Southland since 1973, became its CEO. John

Thompson remained its chairman, and a third brother, Joe C. Thompson, Jr. (Jodie), served as a director of Southland. With 1986 sales of $8.6 billion, Southland was the largest convenience store chain in the world and the twelfth largest retailer in the United States. Exhibit 1 gives a financial summary of Southland and Exhibit 2 lists Southland's holdings at the end of 1986.

7-Eleven stores were open every day of the year and located in residential neighborhoods, on main thoroughfares, in shopping centers, or on other easily accessible sites. They attracted lunchtime customers, early and late shoppers, weekend and holiday shoppers, and customers who needed only a few items at any one time and desired rapid service. Southland maintained a flexible policy in both layout and product mix to appeal to regional preferences. Prices on most items were somewhat higher than those in supermarkets. However, the company emphasized competitive pricing of products that would attract high-volume customer traffic, products such as gasoline, milk, multipack and cartons of cigarettes, 12-packs and cases of soft drinks and beer, as well as money orders and video rentals.

Southland's merchandising programs promoted high-margin, fast-food products, such as the crushed ice drink "Slurpee," "Big Gulp" soft drinks and coffee, freshly made deli-style sandwiches, nachos, "Dunkin Donuts" and "Winchell's" brand doughnuts, and freshly baked pastry products. Southland provided additional customer services such as television tube testers, photocopiers, and facsimile machines. It was the largest seller, nationwide, of state-sponsored lottery tickets and second only to the U.S. Post Office in the number of money orders issued.

# The Leveraged Buyout

On July 6, 1987, the Thompsons initiated a tender offer for 31.5 million shares (66%) of Southland's common stock at $77 per share and 2.5 million shares (100%) of Southland's preferred stock. Each share of Southland's common stock that was not tendered was to be exchanged for $61.32 in cash and a new issue of junior preferred stock with a face value of $15.68 and par value of $25. The tender offer, ending July 31, was successful; 89% of the common stock and 97% of the preferred stock were tendered.

The Thompsons financed the LBO tender offer with a senior term loan of  $2.0 billion and a divestiture loan of$ 495 million. It also issued about $1.5 billion of high-yield public debt. The brothers collectively owned 9% of the common stock (4,623,920 shares) before the LBO. They sold about 44% of their holdings in the tender offer for about $156 million and reinvested the remaining shares, valued at $200 million, in the LBO for 100% of the equity.

# The Divestiture Program

The divestiture program began soon after the LBO. In 1988, Southland sold several business units, including its Dairies group, Chief Auto Parts, Tidel Systems, Reddy Ice Division, Snack Foods Division, and Southland Food Labs Division, for about  $434 million. It also sold about 1,000 7-Eleven stores, its MovieQuik videocassette rental division, 250 vacant store sites, surplus land, and miscellaneous properties for about$ 310 million in 1988. Southland also obtained $327 million by monetizing its future royalty payments from 7-Eleven Japan.

The divestiture program continued throughout 1989, with the sale of 79 stores in San Antonio, Texas, for  $25 million, 59 stores in Minnesota for$ 27 million, and all its properties in Hawaii to 7-Eleven Japan for $75 million. As of December 31, 1989, Southland had retired $700 million of its original $2.0 billion senior term loans and all of its $495 million divestiture loan.

The payments were made from cash generated by operating activities and asset sales and by borrowing under Southland's revolving credit agreement, of which $215 million remained outstanding at December 31, 1989.

Southland's remaining  $50\%$  ownership interest in Citgo was sold for $662 million on January 31, 1990, and the proceeds were applied to its senior term loan and revolving credit facility. Southland was left with about 7,000 7-Eleven stores, 5 distribution centers, 6 food processing centers, 259 High's Dairy Stores, and stakes in overseas 7-Elevens. Exhibit 3 describes Southland's outstanding liabilities as of June 30, 1990.

# The Cash Flow Crisis

The success of Southland's leveraged buyout depended on an increase in sales and profitability. However, to obtain cash to service its debt, Southland substantially reduced its capital expenditures. Capital expenditures were approximately  $111 million and$ 76 million in 1988 and 1989, respectively, compared with an annual average of $398 million in each of the four years immediately preceding the acquisition. This reduction limited Southland's ability to remodel existing stores or open or acquire new stores. Also, in early 1988, Southland canceled all planned advertising to conserve cash. Advertising began again in late 1988, and it was increased in 1989. As a result of these changes, Southland could not effectively compete with traditional and oil company convenience stores that were expanding.

The leveraged buyout forecasted real sales growth of \(3\%\) per year for 10 years. During 1988 and 1989, sales were forecasted to grow to \(9,316 million and \)9,196 million, respectively. However, as Exhibit 1 reports, sales in 1988 were \(7,991 million, \(14\%\) below the LBO projection; in 1989, sales were \(8,352 million, \(9\%\) below the LBO projections. During the first six months of 1990, merchandise sales increased \(3.0\%\) per month while Southland experienced an annualized inflation rate of \(4.9\%\), resulting in negative real growth of \(1.9\%\). Profitability also lagged the LBO forecast. In 1989, EBITDA was $464 million, \(15\%\) below the LBO forecast of $549 million.

Southland did not expect its future performance to reach the levels forecasted at the time of the LBO. Exhibit 4 shows that Southland's July 1990 forecasts were substantially less optimistic than those at the time of its LBO. The company predicted that its cash flow from operations during 1990 would be insufficient to conduct its business operations, meet its debt service obligations, and permit the level of investment in its business necessary to maintain competitiveness. Based on updated projections, Southland believed that it would violate its financial covenants during 1990. Furthermore, it forecasted that it would not have sufficient cash flow to start paying cash interest on its  $16.5\%$  senior subordinated discount notes in 1991.

# The Restructuring Plans

By March 1990, Southland decided to obtain an infusion of new equity by selling control of the company to the Ito Yokado Group, Japan's largest and most profitable supermarket and retail chain operator and 7-Eleven's licensee in Japan for 17 years. The purpose of the plan was to reduce Southland's debt service requirements and provide it with additional capital. Ito Yokado required Southland to restructure its debt and insisted, as did the bankers, that  $95\%$  of the bondholders agree to the restructuring plan.

# The Preliminary Plan, April 9, 1990

In the preliminary restructuring plan, dated April 9, 1990, Ito Yokado was to obtain  $75\%$  of Southland's common stock for $400 million. Bondholders would receive  $10\%$  of the equity and a variety of zero-coupon bonds. Exhibit 5 summarizes the consideration for the bondholders, and Exhibit 6 summarizes the distribution of the equity in the proposed restructuring.

The Thompson family would retain  $15\%$  of the equity. In addition, they received five-year employment agreements and  $78 million in five-year interest-free loans from Ito Yokado. The employment agreements for John P. Thompson, Jere W. Thompson, and Joe C. Thompson, Jr., included annual base salaries of$ 600,000 and an annual bonus of $360,000. Also, John and Jere would be allowed to continue as board members during the terms of their employment agreements, and they would participate in Southland's employee benefit plans. Their duties were not specified in the employment agreement.

Bondholders objected to the preliminary plan because it replaced the existing debt, much of which paid cash interest, with zero-coupon bonds that did not pay cash interest and matured at later dates. Also, if the Thompson family retained ownership of  $15\%$  of the restructured equity, they would obtain a higher return on their equity investment than would many bondholders. According to John Gordon (JD/HBS-MBA 1976), the president of Deltec Securities and chairman of the Southland Bondholders' Committee, "The proposal is totally unacceptable. I would be hard-pressed to think of an initial exchange offer that could be more offensive."

# The First Exchange Offer, July 3, 1990,

In a revised plan that was announced June 14, 1990, and distributed on July 3, bondholders would receive interest-bearing debt securities along with  $14.4\%$  of the equity. The new securities had a face value of $550 million, paid cash interest rates between  $12\%$  and  $14\%$ , and matured within seven years. Exhibit 5 summarizes the bondholder payments. Analysts viewed the plan to be worth about $200 million more than the Preliminary Plan of April 9, 1990.

The Thompsons would receive only  $6.3\%$  of the restructured firm's equity. Other elements of the restructuring plan were unchanged: Ito Yokado would contribute $400 million for  $75\%$  of the equity of Southland; the Thompsons would retain their five-year employment agreements and the five-year interest-free loans, although the loan's maximum amount was changed to $67.2 million.

The plan, developed in consultation with the Bondholders' Committee, was viewed as a substantial improvement over the Preliminary Plan of April 9, 1990. However, the Bondholders' Committee did not endorse it.

# The Revised Exchange Offer, August 2, 1990

Negotiations between Southland, its Bondholder Committee, and Ito Yokado yielded a revised exchange offer that was announced on July 16, 1990, and distributed on August 2. The revised plan substantially increased the payoffs to bondholders. As summarized in Exhibits 5 and 6, bondholders would receive  $22\%$  of the equity of Southland, and preferred stockholders would receive  $3\%$ . Analysts estimated that compared with the First Exchange Offer of July 3, 1990, the revised plan increased the value received by bondholders by about  $15\%$ .

The increase in bondholder consideration was funded by reducing the Thompson family's equity to  $4.9\%$ , from  $6.3\%$ . Also, Ito Yokado increased the amount of cash contributed by  $30 million, to$ 430, and reduced its claim on the post-restructuring equity value by  $5\%$ , to about  $70\%$ . The Thompsons retained their five-year employment agreements and the five-year interest-free loans, although the maximum amount of the loans was changed to $65.2 million.

The revised plan was unanimously approved by the Bondholder Committee. According to John Gordon, its chairman, the revised plan gave bondholders "as much as they could reasonably expect to get" out of the restructuring.

The plan required the approval of the banks, the preferred stockholders, and the public bondholders. Ito Yokado and the banks required approval by  $95\%$  of the bondholders and  $67\%$  of preferred stockholders. Despite several extensions to the exchange offer, Southland was not able to obtain sufficient approvals for the restructuring. Exhibit 7 shows the percentage of securityholders who approved the August 2, 1990, restructuring plan on September 25, 1990. Among bondholders, the highest approval of  $94\%$  was from the holders of Southland's most senior public debt, the  $13.5\%$  senior extendable reset notes. But only  $54\%$  of holders of Southland's most junior debt, the  $18\%$  junior subordinated discount debentures, approved the plan. The holders of  $95\%$  of the cumulative exchangeable preferred stock approved the restructuring.

# The Prepackaged Bankruptcy

Southland's failure to obtain bondholder approval for a restructuring plan further stressed its cash flow, moving the company closer to bankruptcy. A bankruptcy provided an opportunity to accomplish the debt restructuring embedded in the exchange offer without approval of the  $95\%$  of outstanding claims. According to bankruptcy laws, a majority in number and two-thirds of the dollar amount of impaired debt outstanding who vote are required to approve a reorganization plan. If sufficient votes are obtained, the reorganization plan is imposed on all claimholders. Therefore, Southland could successfully reorganize in bankruptcy if it was able to obtain the same approval for its reorganization plan as it had obtained for its Revised Exchange Offer of August 3, 1990.

A standard Chapter 11 bankruptcy was an unattractive alternative for Southland. First, because of the widely held view in Japan of bankruptcy as a mark of dishonor, it was unlikely that Ito Yokado would be willing to participate in a bankruptcy. Without the investment of $430 million by Ito Yokado, Southland would be unable to implement its plans to revitalize its operations. Second, the bankruptcy process involved a substantial amount of time and professional expenses to complete. Third, the bankruptcy process is uncertain, and could disrupt its business. Fourth, the administrative delays associated with bankruptcy could damage Southland's relations with its employees, franchisees, and suppliers.

Southland, with the approval of the Bondholders' Committee and Ito Yokado, decided to attempt another exchange offer together with a request for approving a prepackaged bankruptcy filing. According to bankruptcy law, filing firms can circulate a reorganization plan and obtain approvals for the plan before filing for bankruptcy. Prebankruptcy disclosure and votes can be substituted for similar steps in the bankruptcy process as long as the disclosure and solicitations are in accordance with the applicable nonbankruptcy laws such as the Securities and

Exchange Acts. Such procedures substantially reduces the time and uncertainty associated with bankruptcy.

Southland's prepackaged plan of October 5, 1990, was the same as its Revised Exchange Offer of August 2, 1990. It also included a companion exchange offer that was structured to be more beneficial to holders of few bonds than the prepackaged plan. Southland believed that small holders had disproportionately not tendered their securities in the Exchange Offer of August 2, 1990. As detailed in Exhibit 8, a cash payment was available to holders of less than  $300,000 in bonds who tendered all of their bonds in the exchange offer. The maximum cash amount was limited to$ 35 million and would be prorationed as needed, with preference given inversely to seniority (most junior to most senior). The cash alternative was not available under the prepackaged bankruptcy plan.

Southland was the first major operating company to file a prepackaged plan. It was designed to minimize the uncertainty and disruption associated with bankruptcy. According to the plan, general unsecured claims, including trade claims, would be unimpaired and paid in full without delay. In contrast, such prepetition claims would normally be part of the bankruptcy process and treated as impaired, with payment delayed until the reorganization was completed. Southland also intended to ask the bankruptcy court to honor Southland's employment, franchisee, and license agreements.

The prepackaged bankruptcy option changed the bankruptcy process, but did not change the standards for successfully completing a Chapter 11 reorganization. The plan had to satisfy three conditions: feasibility, approval, and a Chapter 7 liquidation test.

Feasibility This condition required that Southland be able to meet its obligations after completing its reorganization according to the prepackaged plan, without additional financial restructuring. The income and cash flow and capital structure projections in Exhibits 9 and 10, respectively, show that Southland was profitable under the prepackage plan and able to generate sufficient cash flow to meet its obligations.

Approval This condition required Southland to obtain sufficient approvals for the prepackaged plan.

Chapter 7 Liquidation All holders of impaired securities had to either vote for the reorganization plan or receive greater value from the reorganization than from a liquidation under Chapter 7, in which strict priority would be applied. Exhibit 11 summarizes the liquidation analysis presented by Southland. The liquidation analysis assumed that Southland's assets would be sold during a three-year period for 5.5 times EBITDA. While in liquidation, Southland would operate with substantially reduced capital expenditures and advertising expenses. The multiple was based on Southland's divestiture and sales of other convenience stores since its 1987 LBO. It included a premium to reflect the added value of the 7-Eleven trademark and the efficiencies of 7-Eleven stores. The gross liquidation proceeds, including interest income and cash flow during the liquidation period, totaled almost $2.5 billion. After deducting the taxes, liabilities, secured claims, wages, administrative costs, and other priority items, the proceeds available to unsecured creditors was about $388 million at the end of the three-year liquidation period. As Exhibit 12 shows, the liquidation provided funds to repay only 39% of the holders of 12% senior notes. Holders of all other unsecured debt would receive no payments. Holders of the 12% senior notes would recover 62% of their claims under the prepackaged plan, thereby meeting the Chapter 7 liquidation test.

Exhibit 1 The Southland Corporation—Selected Financial Data, 1985-1990 (dollars in millions, except per-share data)  

<table><tr><td rowspan="2"></td><td colspan="4">Pre-LBOa</td><td colspan="4">Post-LBOa</td></tr><tr><td>Year Ended December 31, 1985</td><td>Seven Months Ended July 31, 1987</td><td>Five Months Ended December 31, 1987</td><td>Year Ended December 31, 1988</td><td>Six Months Ended June 30, 1989</td><td>Six Months Ended June 30, 1990</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td colspan="9">Results of Operations</td></tr><tr><td>Revenues</td><td>$7,900</td><td>$7,823</td><td>$4,899</td><td>$3,226</td><td>$7,991</td><td>$8,352</td><td>$4,062</td><td>$4,093</td></tr><tr><td>Gross profit</td><td>1,603</td><td>1,711</td><td>1,012</td><td>695</td><td>1,681</td><td>1,731</td><td>835</td><td>818</td></tr><tr><td>Earnings from continuing operations</td><td>88</td><td>75</td><td>22</td><td>(167.0)b</td><td>(285)</td><td>(1,320.3)c</td><td>(216)</td><td>(180)</td></tr><tr><td>Net earningsd</td><td>213</td><td>200</td><td>90</td><td>(149.7)b</td><td>(216)</td><td>(1,306.9)c</td><td>(236)</td><td>(127.5)c</td></tr><tr><td colspan="9">Other Financial Data</td></tr><tr><td>Selling, general, and administrative expenses</td><td>$1,424</td><td>$1,532</td><td>$947</td><td>$775</td><td>$1,543</td><td>$1,607</td><td>$781</td><td>$827</td></tr><tr><td>Depreciation and amortization expense</td><td>144</td><td>162</td><td>114</td><td>105</td><td>295</td><td>277</td><td>143</td><td>121</td></tr><tr><td>Interest expense-cash</td><td>57</td><td>57</td><td>45</td><td>134</td><td>393</td><td>415</td><td>212</td><td>188</td></tr><tr><td>Interest expense-noncash</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>29</td><td>168</td><td>157</td><td>75</td><td>87</td></tr><tr><td>Citgo cash dividend</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>20</td><td>55</td><td>20</td><td>5</td></tr><tr><td>Capital expenditures</td><td>396</td><td>690</td><td>406</td><td>168</td><td>171</td><td>107</td><td>49</td><td>31</td></tr><tr><td colspan="9">Amount by which earnings from continuing operations before fixed charges are insufficient to cover:</td></tr><tr><td>Fixed charges</td><td>f</td><td>f</td><td>f</td><td>(245)</td><td>(415)</td><td>(1,331)</td><td>(224)</td><td>(252)</td></tr><tr><td>Combined fixed charges and preferred stock dividends</td><td>g</td><td>g</td><td>g</td><td>(246)</td><td>(443)</td><td>(1,352)</td><td>(238)</td><td>(267)</td></tr><tr><td colspan="9">Balance Sheet Data (at end of period)</td></tr><tr><td>Working capital</td><td>($205)</td><td>$46</td><td>NA</td><td>($196)</td><td>($536)</td><td>($458)</td><td>($214)</td><td>($3,722)</td></tr><tr><td>Total assets</td><td>3,131</td><td>3,300</td><td>NA</td><td>5,382</td><td>4,862</td><td>3,439</td><td>4,625</td><td>2,893</td></tr><tr><td>Long-term debt, including current portion</td><td>586</td><td>649</td><td>NA</td><td>4,606</td><td>4,315</td><td>4,150</td><td>4,288</td><td>3,660</td></tr><tr><td>Redeemable common stock purchase warrants</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>NA</td><td>26</td><td>26</td><td>26</td><td>26</td><td>26</td></tr><tr><td>Shareholders&#x27; equity (deficit)</td><td>1,497</td><td>1,668</td><td>NA</td><td>(150)</td><td>(388)</td><td>(1,716)</td><td>(639)</td><td>(1,848)</td></tr><tr><td colspan="9">Per-Share Data</td></tr><tr><td colspan="9">Earnings from continuing operations per common share:</td></tr><tr><td>Primary</td><td>$1.77</td><td>$1.34</td><td>$0.33</td><td>($0.84)</td><td>($1.56)</td><td>($6.54)</td><td>($1.12)</td><td>($0.90)</td></tr><tr><td>Fully diluted</td><td>1.77</td><td>1.34</td><td>0.33</td><td>(0.84)</td><td>(1.56)</td><td>(6.54)</td><td>(1.12)</td><td>(0.90)</td></tr><tr><td>Cash dividends per common share</td><td>1.00</td><td>1.12</td><td>0.56</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td colspan="9">Earnings from Continuing Operations per Common Share after the Stock Split</td></tr><tr><td>Primary</td><td>$17.74</td><td>$13.41</td><td>$3.35</td><td>($8.40)</td><td>($15.63)</td><td>($65.41)</td><td>($11.24)</td><td>($9.03)</td></tr><tr><td>Fully diluted</td><td>17.74</td><td>13.41</td><td>3.35</td><td>(8.40)</td><td>(15.63)</td><td>(65.41)</td><td>(11.24)</td><td>(9.03)</td></tr><tr><td>Cash Dividends per Common Share After the Stock Split</td><td>10.00</td><td>11.20</td><td>5.59</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>-</td></tr></table>

# Exhibit 1 (continued) Notes to Selected Financial Data, 1985-1990

<sup>a</sup>The financial data presented for the Company subsequent to July 31, 1987, are not comparable to those shown for the Company prior to August 1, 1987, due to the application of purchase accounting.

<sup>b</sup>The five months ended December 31, 1987, included nonrecurring expenses relating to the acquisition of $46,100,000 worth of stock option expenses and $55,500,000 relating to the unhedging of currency-exchange agreements.

Earnings from continuing operations and net earnings for the year ended December 31, 1989, reflect the write-off of \(946,974,000 of excess of cost over fair value of net assets acquired.

${}^{d}$  Net earnings include earnings from discontinued operations and for the year ended December 31, 1989, an extraordinary charge of $56,047,000 resulting from a debt exchange.

eNet earnings include extraordinary tax benefits from utilization of net operating loss carryforwards of \(52,040,000 for the six-month period ended June 30, 1990.

${}^{f}$  Ratio of earnings to fixed charges is 2.15,1.93,and 1.32 for each of fiscal years 1985 and 1986 and for the first seven months ended July 31, 1987, respectively. Such ratios are computed by dividing (i) earnings from continuing operations before fixed charges and taxes by (ii) fixed charges (which consist of interest expense, amortization of debt expenses, capitalized interest, and rental expense, which is deemed to be representative of the interest factor).

$^\mathrm{g}$ Ratio of earnings to combined fixed charges and preferred stock dividends is 2.05, 1.69, and 1.18 for the fiscal years 1985 and 1986 and for the seven months ended July 31, 1987, respectively. Such ratios are computed by dividing (i) earnings from continuing operations before fixed charges and taxes by (ii) fixed charges (which consist of interest expense, amortization of debt expenses, capitalized interest, and rental expense, which is deemed to be representative of the interest factor) and preferred stock dividends, which have been increased by an amount representing the pretax earnings that would be required to cover such dividend requirements.

Exhibit 2 The Southland Corporation's Facilities, 1986  

<table><tr><td colspan="2">Convenience Retailing</td></tr><tr><td>7-Eleven</td><td>7,672</td></tr><tr><td>Other retail:</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Quick Mart, Super-7</td><td>163</td></tr><tr><td>Chief Auto Parts</td><td>465</td></tr><tr><td>High&#x27;s Dairy Stores</td><td>346</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>8,646</td></tr><tr><td>International Affiliates:</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Sweden: 7-Eleven</td><td>68</td></tr><tr><td>Mexico: Super Siete</td><td>61</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>129</td></tr><tr><td>7-Eleven Area Licensees:</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>United States</td><td>494</td></tr><tr><td>International</td><td>3,479</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>3,973</td></tr><tr><td>Total retail units</td><td>12,748</td></tr><tr><td>Distribution centers</td><td>5</td></tr><tr><td>Chief Auto Parts warehouses</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">Food Processing and Manufacturing</td></tr><tr><td>Dairies:</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Processing plants</td><td>28</td></tr><tr><td>Distribution points</td><td>62</td></tr><tr><td>Food centers</td><td>6</td></tr><tr><td>Snack food plants</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>Reddy Ice plants</td><td>9</td></tr><tr><td>Food Labs plants</td><td>3</td></tr><tr><td>Tidel Systems plant</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">Citgo Facilities</td></tr><tr><td>Citgo refinery</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>Cit-Con lubricants refineryb</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>Lubricants compounding/packaging plant</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>Refined product terminalsb</td><td>39</td></tr><tr><td>Pipelines (miles):b</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Crude oil gathering</td><td>7,512</td></tr><tr><td>Refined product</td><td>7,982</td></tr></table>

Source: The Southland Corporation 1986 Annual Report.  
aAcquired December 31, 1986.  
bVarious ownership interests.

Exhibit 3 Long-Term Debt Obligations of Southland, June 30, 1990  

<table><tr><td></td><td>($ thousands)</td></tr><tr><td>Senior term loan under Credit Agreement</td><td>$ 887,419</td></tr><tr><td>Revolving credit facility</td><td>75,000</td></tr><tr><td>6¼% yen loan</td><td>320,559</td></tr><tr><td>Canadian revolving credit facility</td><td>10,152</td></tr><tr><td>7½% Cityplace notes</td><td>280,531</td></tr><tr><td>Real estate and equipment notes and other debt</td><td>35,017</td></tr><tr><td>Capital lease obligations</td><td>175,303</td></tr><tr><td>12% Canadian notes</td><td>43,029</td></tr><tr><td>Old senior notes</td><td>563,340</td></tr><tr><td>Old senior subordinated notes</td><td>350,000</td></tr><tr><td>Old senior subordinated discount notes</td><td>374,158</td></tr><tr><td>Old subordinated debentures</td><td>500,000</td></tr><tr><td>Old junior subordinated debentures</td><td>45,599</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>$3,660,107</td></tr></table>

Source: Southland proxy dated October 5, 1990, p. 59.

Exhibit 4 Projection Comparison (\$ millions)  

<table><tr><td></td><td>1990</td><td>1991</td><td>1992</td><td>1993</td><td>1994</td><td>1995</td><td>1996</td><td>1997</td></tr><tr><td colspan="9">Sales</td></tr><tr><td>December 1987</td><td>$9,409</td><td>$10,178</td><td>$11,006</td><td>$11,900</td><td>$12,864</td><td>$13,904</td><td>$15,024</td><td>$16,227</td></tr><tr><td>July 1990</td><td>8,372</td><td>8,699</td><td>9,197</td><td>9,775</td><td>10,481</td><td>11,284</td><td>12,230</td><td>13,136</td></tr><tr><td colspan="9">EBITDA (excluding Citgo dividends)</td></tr><tr><td>December 1987</td><td>602</td><td>666</td><td>748</td><td>849</td><td>966</td><td>1,065</td><td>1,184</td><td>1,313</td></tr><tr><td>July 1990</td><td>340</td><td>370</td><td>415</td><td>443</td><td>468</td><td>503</td><td>543</td><td>593</td></tr></table>

Source: The Southland Corporation Proxy, July 3, 1990, p. 23.

Exhibit 5 Summary of Southland's Restructuring Plans  

<table><tr><td>Outstanding Obligation</td><td>April 9, 1990(Per $1,000 Principal Amount orShare, Holders Will Receive)</td><td>July 3, 1990(Per $1,000 Principal Amount orShare, Holders Will Receive</td><td>August 2, 1990(Per $1,000 Principal Amount orShare, Holders Will Receive)</td></tr><tr><td>13½% Senior Extendable Reset Notes due December 15, 1995, and extendable to June 15, 1997.</td><td>$1,000 principal amount of Zero-Coupon Senior Notes due December 15, 1998, and 113 shares of Common Stock, par value $.01 per share.</td><td>$450 principal amount of 12% Senior Notes due December 15, 1996, 37 shares of Common Stock.</td><td>$475 principal amount of 12% Senior Notes due December 15,1996, 86.5 shares of Common Stock, and $57 in cash.</td></tr><tr><td>15¼% Senior Subordinated Notes due December 15, 1997.</td><td>$1,000 principal amount of Zero-Coupon First-Priority Senior Subordinated Debentures (Series A) due June 15, 2001, and 70 shares of Common Stock.</td><td>$300 principal amount of 13% First-Priority Senior Subordinated Debentures due June 15, 1997 and 24.5 shares of Common Stock.</td><td>$650 principal amount of 5% First-Priority Senior Subordinated Debentures due December 15, 2003, and 40.5 shares of Common Stock.</td></tr><tr><td>16½% Senior Subordinated Discount Notes due December 15, 1997.</td><td>$854 principal amount of Zero-Coupon First-Priority Senior Subordinated Debentures (Series B) due June 15, 2001, and 60 shares of Common Stock.</td><td>$225 principal amount of New First-Priority Notes and 21 shares of Common Stock.</td><td>$555 principal amount of New First-Priority Debentures and 35 shares of Common Stock.</td></tr><tr><td>16¾% Subordinated Debentures due December 15, 2002.</td><td>$1,000 principal amount of Zero-Coupon Second-Priority Senior Subordinated Debentures (Series A) due December 15, 2003, and 46 shares of Common Stock.</td><td>$200 principal amount of 14% Second-Priority Senior Subordinated Notes due June 15, 1997, and 16.5 shares of Common Stock.</td><td>$500 principal amount of 4.5% Second-Priority Senior Subordinated Debentures (Series A) due June 15, 2004, and 28 shares of Common Stock.</td></tr><tr><td>18% Junior Subordinated Discount Debentures due December 15, 2007.</td><td>$571 principal amount of Zero-Coupon Second-Priority Senior Subordinated Debentures (Series B) due December 15, 2003, and 19 shares of Common Stock.</td><td>$95 principal amount of New Second-Priority Notes and 8 shares of Common Stock.</td><td>$257 principal amount of 4% Second-Priority Senior Subordinated Debentures (Series B) due June 15, 2004, and 11 shares of Common Stock.</td></tr><tr><td>15% Cumulative Exchangeable Preferred Stock, Series One, $25 liquidation preference per share.</td><td>One share of 13½% Cumulative Convertible Exchangeable Preferred Stock, $1.05 liquidation preference per share, and one-third of a share of Common Stock.</td><td>One share of Common Stock.</td><td>One share of Common Stock.</td></tr></table>

This document is authorized for use only by Roger Lin in BUSN 35202 81,01 (Spring 2023) Financial Markets and Institutions at University of Chicago, 2023.

Exhibit 6 Summary of Equity Ownership Proposed in the Three Exchange Offers  

<table><tr><td rowspan="2"></td><td colspan="2">Date of Plan</td><td rowspan="2">August 2, 1990</td></tr><tr><td>April 9, 1990</td><td>July 3, 1990</td></tr><tr><td>Ito Yokado</td><td>75%</td><td>75%</td><td>70%</td></tr><tr><td>Thompson brothers</td><td>15</td><td>6</td><td>5</td></tr><tr><td>Bondholders</td><td>9</td><td>14</td><td>22</td></tr><tr><td>Preferred stockholders</td><td>1</td><td>4</td><td>3</td></tr></table>

Exhibit 7 Percentage of Approval by Security Holders in the Exchange Offer of August 2, 1990 on September 25, 1990  

<table><tr><td>Outstanding Obligation</td><td>Approval</td></tr><tr><td>13½% senior extendable reset notes due December 15, 1995 and extendable to June 15, 1997</td><td>94.0%</td></tr><tr><td>15¾% senior subordinated notes due December 15, 1997</td><td>69.4</td></tr><tr><td>16½% senior subordinated discount notes due December 15, 1997</td><td>65.4</td></tr><tr><td>16% subordinated debentures due December 15, 2002</td><td>45.6</td></tr><tr><td>18% junior subordinated discount debentures due December 15, 2007</td><td>53.7</td></tr><tr><td>15% cumulative exchangeable preferred stock, Series One, $25 liquidation preference per share</td><td>94.6</td></tr></table>

Exhibit 8 Terms of the October 5, 1990, Exchange Offer  

<table><tr><td rowspan="2">Outstanding Obligation</td><td colspan="2">Per $1,000 Principal Amount Holders Will Receive</td></tr><tr><td>All Holders</td><td>Holders of Less Than $300,000 in Securities Who Tender All of Their Securitiesa</td></tr><tr><td>13½% Senior Extendable Reset Notes due December 15, 1995, and extendable to June 15, 1997.</td><td>$475 principal amount of 12% Senior Notes due December 15,1996, 86.5 shares of Common Stock, and $57 in cash.</td><td>$492.30 in cash and 86.5 shares of Common Stock.</td></tr><tr><td>15¾% Senior Subordinated Notes due December 15, 1997.</td><td>$650 principal amount of 5% First-Priority Senior Subordinated Debentures due December 15, 2003, and 40.5 shares of Common Stock.</td><td>$266.87 in cash and 40.5 shares of Common Stock.</td></tr><tr><td>16½% Senior Subordinated Discount Notes due December 15, 1997.</td><td>$555 principal amount of New First-Priority Debentures and 35 shares of Common Stock.</td><td>$227.87 in cash and 35 shares of Common Stock.</td></tr><tr><td>16¾% Subordinated Debentures due December 15, 2002.</td><td>$500 principal amount of 4.5% Second-Priority Senior Subordinated Debentures (Series A) due June 15, 2004, and 28 shares of Common Stock.</td><td>$182.28 in cash and 28 shares of Common Stock</td></tr><tr><td>18% Junior Subordinated Discount Debentures due December 15, 2007.</td><td>$257 principal amount of 4% Second-Priority Senior Subordinated Debentures (Series B) due June 15, 2004, and 11 shares of Common Stock.</td><td>$86.59 in cash and 11 shares of Common Stock.</td></tr><tr><td>15% Cumulative Exchangeable Preferred Stock, Series One, $25 liquidation preference per share.</td><td>One share of Common Stock.</td><td>One share of Common Stock.</td></tr></table>

$aCash payments are limited to$ 35 million and are subject to prorationing. The prorationing procedure required that holders of Junior Subordinated Discount Debentures receive full payment first; holders of the Subordinated Debentures receive full payment second; holders of Senior Subordinated Debentures receive full payment third; and holders of Senior Notes receive any remaining payments.

Exhibit 9 Pro Forma Income and Cash Flow Statement for the Prepackaged Plan, 1989-1997  

<table><tr><td rowspan="2"></td><td rowspan="2">Actual1989</td><td colspan="8">Year Ending December 31</td></tr><tr><td>1990</td><td>1991</td><td>1992</td><td>1993</td><td>1994</td><td>1995</td><td>1996</td><td>1997</td></tr><tr><td>Net sales</td><td>$ 8,275</td><td>$8,285</td><td>$8,195</td><td>$8,509</td><td>$9,001</td><td>$9,632</td><td>$10,347</td><td>$11,188</td><td>$12,155</td></tr><tr><td>EBITDA</td><td>464a</td><td>269b</td><td>350</td><td>387</td><td>413</td><td>446</td><td>485</td><td>531</td><td>587</td></tr><tr><td>Interest income</td><td>0</td><td>3</td><td>13</td><td>19</td><td>11</td><td>2</td><td>2</td><td>3</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>Depreciation and amortization</td><td>(277)</td><td>(236)</td><td>(214)</td><td>(196)</td><td>(184)</td><td>(190)</td><td>(195)</td><td>(213)</td><td>(227)</td></tr><tr><td>Write-off of goodwill</td><td>(947)</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>Equity in earnings of Citgo</td><td>70</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>EBIT</td><td>(690)</td><td>36</td><td>149</td><td>210</td><td>240</td><td>258</td><td>292</td><td>321</td><td>362</td></tr><tr><td>Cash interest expensec</td><td>(415)</td><td>(304)</td><td>(161)</td><td>(134)</td><td>(114)</td><td>(91)</td><td>(93)</td><td>(91)</td><td>(110)</td></tr><tr><td>Noncash interest expensed</td><td>(157)</td><td>(129)</td><td>(12)</td><td>(3)</td><td>(2)</td><td>(2)</td><td>(2)</td><td>(1)</td><td>(1)</td></tr><tr><td>Gain on sale of assets</td><td>(1)e</td><td>0</td><td>61</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>Extraordinary gain on debt exchange</td><td>(56)</td><td>0</td><td>285</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>Extraordinary income from NOL</td><td>0</td><td>52</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>Earnings before tax</td><td>($1,319)</td><td>$(345)</td><td>$ 322</td><td>$ 73</td><td>$ 124</td><td>$ 165</td><td>$ 197</td><td>$ 229</td><td>$ 251</td></tr><tr><td>Income taxes</td><td>(12)</td><td>(149)</td><td>0</td><td>35</td><td>48</td><td>60</td><td>66</td><td>79</td><td>97</td></tr><tr><td>Net earnings</td><td>$(1,307)</td><td>(196)</td><td>$ 322</td><td>$ 38</td><td>$ 76</td><td>$ 105</td><td>$ 131</td><td>$ 150</td><td>$ 154</td></tr><tr><td>Noncash itemsf</td><td>1,360</td><td>365</td><td>282</td><td>199</td><td>187</td><td>192</td><td>192</td><td>213</td><td>227</td></tr><tr><td>Change in working capital</td><td>216</td><td>(399)</td><td>65</td><td>28</td><td>17</td><td>8</td><td>9</td><td>1</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>Cash from operations</td><td>269</td><td>(230)</td><td>669</td><td>265</td><td>280</td><td>305</td><td>332</td><td>364</td><td>383</td></tr><tr><td>Proceeds from sale of Citgo</td><td>(5)</td><td>662</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>Dividends from Citgo</td><td>55</td><td>5</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>Payments for purchase of PP&amp;E</td><td>(107)</td><td>(44)</td><td>(139)</td><td>(205)</td><td>(203)</td><td>(205)</td><td>(204)</td><td>(236)</td><td>(242)</td></tr><tr><td>Proceeds from the sale of PP&amp;E</td><td>97</td><td>117</td><td>193</td><td>36</td><td>38</td><td>40</td><td>42</td><td>44</td><td>45</td></tr><tr><td>Change in other assets</td><td>10</td><td>(4)</td><td>(2)</td><td>(1)</td><td>(3)</td><td>(5)</td><td>(4)</td><td>(2)</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>Other sources of cash</td><td>50</td><td>736</td><td>52</td><td>(170)</td><td>(168)</td><td>(170)</td><td>(166)</td><td>(194)</td><td>(197)</td></tr><tr><td>Cash before financings</td><td>319</td><td>506</td><td>721</td><td>95</td><td>112</td><td>135</td><td>166</td><td>170</td><td>186</td></tr><tr><td>Repayments and financingsg</td><td>(332)</td><td>(495)</td><td>(516)</td><td>(198)</td><td>(214)</td><td>(133)</td><td>(149)</td><td>(188)</td><td>(187)</td></tr><tr><td>Net cash flow</td><td>(13)</td><td>11</td><td>205</td><td>(103)</td><td>(102)</td><td>2</td><td>17</td><td>(18)</td><td>(1)</td></tr></table>

Source: The Southland Corporation Proxy Statement, October 5, 1990.  
\(a\)Includes \(\$ 33\)million of gain on sale of stores.  
\(b\)Difference between 1989 EBITDA and 1990 EBITDA is attributable to items set forth in footnote (a) above and the reduction of \(6 million associated with divested stores, the reduction of \(\$ 16\)million associated with an increase in LIFO reserve, the reduction of \(\$ 37\)million associated with onetime financing fees and other expenses, the \(\$ 59\)million decrease in ongoing store EBITDA, a \(\$ 17\)million decrease in EBITDA at the distribution and food centers, and a \(\$ 27\)million loss on the sale of the land surrounding Cityplace Center East.  
\(c\)Does not include cash interest payments on the New Debt Securities of \(\$ 97\)million in 1991, \(\$ 65\)million in the years 1992 through 1996, and \(\$ 33\)million in 1997.  
dIncludes the amortization of deferred debt expense.  
eGain of  $205 million on sale of 50% interest in Citgo was offset by a tax liability of$ 206 million.  
fIncludes depreciation, noncash gains and losses, and amortization of deferred debt expense.  
The cash interest payments on the New Debt Securities are treated as reduction in principal under FAS No. 15.

Exhibit 10 Pro Forma Balance Sheet for the Prepackaged Plan (Revision 4, October 5, 1990), 1989-1997  

<table><tr><td rowspan="2">Income Statement</td><td rowspan="2">Actual1989</td><td colspan="8">Year Ending December 31</td></tr><tr><td>1990</td><td>1991</td><td>1992</td><td>1993</td><td>1994</td><td>1995</td><td>1996</td><td>1997</td></tr><tr><td>Cash and equivalents</td><td>$ 8</td><td>$ 20</td><td>$ 225</td><td>$ 124</td><td>$ 20</td><td>$ 20</td><td>$ 37</td><td>$ 20</td><td>$ 20</td></tr><tr><td>Other current assets</td><td>922</td><td>515</td><td>526</td><td>535</td><td>547</td><td>573</td><td>602</td><td>636</td><td>673</td></tr><tr><td>Total current assets</td><td>$ 930</td><td>$ 535</td><td>$ 751</td><td>$ 659</td><td>$ 567</td><td>$ 593</td><td>$ 639</td><td>$ 656</td><td>$ 693</td></tr><tr><td>Net property, plant, and equipment</td><td>1,995</td><td>1,710</td><td>1,471</td><td>1,464</td><td>1,464</td><td>1,459</td><td>1,445</td><td>1,443</td><td>1,432</td></tr><tr><td>Other assets</td><td>399</td><td>383</td><td>366</td><td>347</td><td>332</td><td>318</td><td>303</td><td>286</td><td>268</td></tr><tr><td>Total assets</td><td>$3,324</td><td>$2,628</td><td>$2,588</td><td>$2,470</td><td>$2,363</td><td>$2,370</td><td>$2,387</td><td>$2,385</td><td>$2,393</td></tr><tr><td>Working capital loan</td><td>$ 215</td><td>$ 73</td><td>$ 0</td><td>$ 0</td><td>$ 81</td><td>$ 351</td><td>$ 0</td><td>$ 192</td><td>$ 105</td></tr><tr><td>Current portions of long-term debt</td><td>467</td><td>296</td><td>198</td><td>295</td><td>403</td><td>298</td><td>380</td><td>101</td><td>83</td></tr><tr><td>Other current liabilities</td><td>696</td><td>573</td><td>663</td><td>706</td><td>741</td><td>775</td><td>811</td><td>845</td><td>882</td></tr><tr><td>Total current liabilities</td><td>$1,378</td><td>$ 942</td><td>$ 861</td><td>$1,001</td><td>$1,225</td><td>$1,424</td><td>$1,191</td><td>$1,138</td><td>$1,070</td></tr><tr><td>Total long-term debt</td><td>3,381</td><td>3,329</td><td>2,633</td><td>2,341</td><td>1,940</td><td>1,644</td><td>1,761</td><td>1,661</td><td>1,579</td></tr><tr><td>Deferred credits and other liabilities</td><td>115</td><td>102</td><td>88</td><td>83</td><td>79</td><td>79</td><td>80</td><td>82</td><td>85</td></tr><tr><td>Total liabilities</td><td>$4,874</td><td>$4,373</td><td>$3,582</td><td>$3,425</td><td>$3,244</td><td>$3,147</td><td>$3,032</td><td>$2,881</td><td>$2,734</td></tr><tr><td>Warrants</td><td>26</td><td>26</td><td>26</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>Preferred stock</td><td>140</td><td>147</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>Shareholders&#x27; equity</td><td>(1,716)</td><td>(1,918)</td><td>(1,020)</td><td>(955)</td><td>(881)</td><td>(777)</td><td>(645)</td><td>(496)</td><td>(341)</td></tr><tr><td>Total liabilities and shareholders&#x27; equity</td><td>$3,324</td><td>$2,628</td><td>$2,588</td><td>$2,470</td><td>$2,363</td><td>$2,370</td><td>$2,387</td><td>$2,385</td><td>$2,393</td></tr></table>

Source: The Southland Corporation Proxy Statement, October 5, 1990.

Exhibit 11 Summary of Chapter 7 Liquidation Analysis (\$ millions)  

<table><tr><td colspan="3">Calculation of Net Proceeds Available in Chapter 7
Liquidation for Payment to Holders of All Unsecured Claims</td></tr><tr><td>Total proceeds from liquidation and interest income</td><td>$2,267</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Net cash flow from operations during liquidation period</td><td>213</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Gross liquidation proceeds</td><td></td><td>$2,480</td></tr><tr><td>Less administrative costs</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Liquidation tax liabilities</td><td>(235)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Trustee and professional fees; other administrative costs</td><td>(85)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>(320)</td></tr><tr><td>Less secured claims (including accrued interest)</td><td></td><td>(1,660)</td></tr><tr><td>Less priority claims</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Priority wages, vacation pay, severance, and other benefits</td><td>(58)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Priority taxes</td><td>(54)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>(112)</td></tr><tr><td>Net proceeds available for distribution to all unsecured creditors</td><td></td><td>$ 388</td></tr></table>

Exhibit 12 Payoffs to Claimants in Liquidation and Reorganization (\$ millions)  

<table><tr><td rowspan="2"></td><td colspan="3">Liquidation Value</td><td colspan="2">Reorganization Value</td></tr><tr><td>Claim</td><td>Amounta</td><td>Percentb</td><td>Amountc</td><td>Percentb</td></tr><tr><td>General unsecured creditorsd</td><td>388</td><td>$ 44</td><td>11%</td><td>$388</td><td>100%</td></tr><tr><td>Senior notes</td><td>593</td><td>232</td><td>39</td><td>369</td><td>62</td></tr><tr><td>Senior subordinates notes</td><td>396</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>130</td><td>33</td></tr><tr><td>Senior subordinated discount notes</td><td>392</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>110</td><td>28</td></tr><tr><td>Subordinated debentures</td><td>560</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>128</td><td>22</td></tr><tr><td>Junior subordinated debentures</td><td>51</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>5</td><td>10</td></tr><tr><td>Preferred stock</td><td>NA</td><td>0</td><td>NA</td><td>15</td><td>NA</td></tr><tr><td>Common stock</td><td>NA</td><td>0</td><td>NA</td><td>31</td><td>NA</td></tr></table>

aThe total liquidation value in Exhibit 11 is discounted for three years at  $12\%$ .

${}^{\mathrm{b}}$  Defined as the amount as a percentage of the claim.

<sup>c</sup>Assumes that the yield to maturity is 14% for New Senior Notes; 15% for New First-Priority Debentures; and 16% for New Second-Priority Debentures. Common stock is valued at $1.50 per share, which is the value implicit in Ito Yokado's purchase.

dGeneral Unsecured Creditors, Senior Notes, and all types of subordinated notes and debentures would be ranked equally in a Chapter 7 liquidation. Proceeds would be prorated based on the claims outstanding. Because the subordinated notes and debentures are contractually subordinated to the Senior Notes, the Senior Notes would receive the prorated share of the subordinated claims.