this remarkable character, and shows that the influence of Badi' az-Zam'an al-Hamadani is very great indeed, but considers that Hariri, though imitating his renowned predecessor, shows nevertheless greater talent. Hariri does not imitate Hamadani, but gives us the vivid picture of real men of the lower classes, such as could be found in Basra in his time. Even al-Harith ben Hammam is not altogether a fictitious person; we have in him a kind of representation of al-Hariri himself, while some of the accomplishments of Harir are attributed to the vagabond-hero of the Maqamat.

Mr. Dumas concludes his study by a comparison of the Maqāmāt with the bourgeois literature of France during the later Middle Ages, and arrives at the result that the Maqāmāt of Harīrī, being a pendant to this literature, are really on a higher moral level than the French literature of the same type. We might argue against this that after all the work of Harīrī depicting the lower shades of social life was intended for the benefit of the learned classes, which the so-called bourgeois literature of France did not pretend to be.

In conclusion, I must say that this admirable study is very delightful reading, which should encourage a study of Hariri, were it not for the great difficulty of mastering the Arabic text with ease, even for those who have made good progress in the knowledge of the language.

F. KRENKOW.

THE I-LI, OR BOOK OF ETIQUE TEE AND CEREMONIAL. Translated from the Chinese, with Introduction, Notes, and Plans, by JOHN STEELE, M.A., D.Lit. 2 vols. Probstain & Co.

In responding to Dr. Legge's challenge of a generation ago, Dr. Steele has produced for us an eminently sane work, a fitting corollary, moreover, to the Rev. W. E.

Soothill's Three Religions of China and Dr. J. J. M. De Groot's Religion in China, which appeared together about 1912. The I-li may be fairly styled the Chinese Leviticus, with the all-important exception that there never was a priestly caste or tribe in China, where, on the contrary, each paterfamilias stood in the position of officiating priest for the family; each vassal prince (besides being family priest) officiating for his principality, and the Supreme King or Emperor (besides being family priest) officiating for "all under heaven", i.e. the empire or world as the Chinese conceived it—the orbis terrarum of the Romans. Hence, as Dr. Steele points out, the dual function of Shang Ti, or "the Emperor Above", being the personal anima of impersonal Heaven, and at the same time the spiritual animus of the incarnate Ti or reigning Emperor below. Dr. Legge was convinced that Shang Ti was the oldest religious conception, and that the ancient Chinese conceived, or had "revealed" to them, anterior to the more or less "idolatrous" ancestorworship, a single omniscient God, Creator of All Things. This view was ably challenged by "Inquirer" and others of the missionary body, who maintained that T'ien or Heaven was the true Elohim or Jehovah, the most ancient God, of the Chinese. These arguments might go on without definite result to the crack of doom, for we are all apt to forget that ex nihilo nihil fit, and that in any case it is futile to attribute a precision of thought not possessed by ourselves to primitive men incapable of even recording their crude opinions. Sir Oliver Lodge publicly declared a month or two ago that he had no idea whatever what life was, and this confession enables us to see clearly what a thoroughly sound substitute for imaginative philosophy the unsophisticated Chinese unanimously accepted 4,000 years before Eastern and Western sages had exhausted their powers in producing this supremely negative result. The primitive Chinaman

said: “It is plain that my parents were my immediate creators, and that I and my wife can either create or refrain: hence, whatever ‘life’ may be, I owe a debt to my parents for my joie de vivre, and my children owe exactly the same debt to me.” Death is simply the complement or negative aspect of life; but features, tone of voice, peculiarities of gait, and so on, continue in the family circle, even after, as Cicero says, the “soul has escaped from the chains of the body”. This is the core of Chinese religion, or that which man is religens about—the convinced feeling that each male forms an everlasting indissoluble link with his male ancestor and his male descendant; this is why Chinese abroad (those at least who may not have taken fresh spiritual root in a safe country) are religens, or anxious at all costs to have their remains carried home. The calling back of the departing spirit, the periodical refreshment of the wandering ghost, the respectful summoning of the spirit-tablet at fixed seasons, the impersonation or doctrine of the “real presence”, and so on, are all part and parcel of the one central insistent idea, that the living links have a perpetual duty to the dead links in the chain of eternity, and that the dead can control the living by invisible appreciation or the reverse of this perpetual duty fulfilled or neglected. The “Animism” of Dr. De Groot and the “Spiritism” of Dr. Steele are thus rather an extension than a basis of the true core—continuity, or endless chain of life—above described. Heaven and God (Shang Ti) are scarcely so much as mentioned in the I-li; the Emperor (posthumously called Ti, or Divus) was “Son of Heaven” in the same vague way that the Turkish or Scythian Khans of 2,000 years ago were the Tengri Kudu, or the Pharaohs were the “Sons of Ra”—as, in fact, the deceased Emperors were the Divi Imperatores of Rome.

Like the Analects of Confucius, the supposed earliest parts of the  $I$ -li are terse and sententious in style,

or, as Dr. Steele puts it, “of the gnomic order”; the writer of these lines went conscientiously through the whole original text forty years ago, and therefore feels that he has some slight title to say off-hand that Dr. Steele's translation is on the face of it as safe and scrupulous as any man's could be: it is, however, to be observed that the author uniformly styles the Shang or Yin dynasty the Yūn: true, this is merely a point in etymology, or “small learning” as the Chinese call it, but the barbarous üng of the outlandish Foochow dialect seems the only possible justification for such a surprise, and in any case Dr. Steele in all other respects conforms to Wade's spelling, or the “mandarin”; in one place only (p. 265) he equally unaccountably writes Hsiang for the same dynasty: these remarks, however, perhaps savour of a specialist's “fad”. Students of comparative religion will find Dr. Steele's book of inexhaustible interest; but too much of it administered at once has naturally a tendency to pall; for, in remote times, when there were no newspapers, no artificial lights, no consecutive, detailed, or explanatory writings, primitive man, when the day's work was done, inevitably had to fall back upon trivial personal and sumptuary detail in order to assert his personal dignity and to kill or to fill up superfluous time: indeed, Dr. Steele himself is lost in amazement at “the extraordinary elaboration of ceremonial detail. It leaves one wondering whether any period earlier than the hey-day of the Chou dynasty [say B.C. 1100] would have allowed of such meticulous regulation of its ceremonial”. Indeed, he is right, there are no earlier traces of this Byzantine fulsomeness on record, and Confucius himself expressed his regret that any such possible records had utterly disappeared even in his time. It was only after the revolution of B.C. 841-827, when a more adequate and expressive form of writing was arranged, when trade and manufactures had grown active,

when inter-state communications and separatist ambitions had become dominant, that a great administrative philosopher named Kwan-tsz (seventh century B.C.) arose who developed practical administrative knowledge at the expense of mere court form. Both Lao-tsz (c. 590-530) and Confucius (551-479) seem to have studied Kwan-tsz's writings, which are still with us (manifestly collected in “gnomic” form and “put to literature” well after Confucius' time): Confucius often spoke with respect, yet with reserve, of Kwan-tsz, and frankly confessed that at any rate, with all his faults, Kwan-tsz undoubtedly saved China from “becoming Tartar”. Lao-tsz, with whose name the political philosophy of Taoism is chiefly associated, manifestly borrowed most of his cosmological Tao (i.e. Universism, or the Way of Nature) from Kwan-tsz, who at the same time developed the old continuity religion in so far as it could subserve his practical aim at saving China from greed and anarchy; but the democratic Lao-tsz utterly despised the meticulous futility of the I-li, and his contempt was even carried against the person of Confucius, its chief prophet. Confucius, however, was an ardent supporter of forms and observances, class distinctions, the divine right of kings, and such matters. Thus, after centuries (B.C. 750-250) of contentious philosophy, China finally plumped for Confucius (B.C. 100) as the best stay of dynastic interests, and despite the rivalry of Taoism and the various foreign religions Confucianism has held its own to this day: in the heat of republican enthusiasm it was practically abolished in 1912, but in the end the law-reformers (1906-13) came to the conclusion that ancestral “worship” (that is, family and state duty) and not foreign religion was the true moral basis on which modern law should be reformed, and President Yuan Shi-kai subsequently went in solemn state to worship at the Temple of Heaven, or, as Dr. Steele's I-li has it, at

the kiao, or suburb, of the royal imperial capital. The modern popular Taoism has no more to do intellectually with the old philosophy than the Moirmons and the beanfeasters of America give expression to the Jewish Canon. Taoism—the popular form—also was abolished in 1912, but, at the instance of the filibuster Chang Hūn, the sixty-second “Pope” was restored to his temporal rights by President Yüan. All religions are now free in China, but throughout all Buddhist, Mazdean, Manichean, Moslem, and Christian influences, the Chinese race has remained as a whole faithful to its continuity idea, as quaintly illustrated by the I-li, which, though obsolescent, is not more so than the principles of the Old Testament are to the average Christian.

E. H. PArkER.

THE ENCYCLOPEDIA SINICA. By SAMUEL COULING, M.A. (Edin.), D.Litt., etc. Shanghai and London: Kelly & Walsh.

Dr. Couling has been engaged for some years upon this extremely useful work, the first of the two volumes having reached England about the middle of October. As the learned editor informs us in his preface, the present issue is but a cadre, the units of which can be extended indefinitely by his successors, much as the Encyclopaedia Britannica, from modest beginnings, has, generation by generation, attained to its present full dimensions. Dr. Couling's effort may be described as a magnified index to things Chinese, the index being filled out under each head so far as present knowledge allows, designed to meet the immediate requirements of all classes, missionary, commercial, or other, interested in whatever phase of China, Japan, or Far Eastern work. The only approach to anything of the sort hitherto available is Mr. E. T. C. Werner's vast sociological digest published
