# Exchange-Traded Funds and Their Competitors

Gary L. Gastineau

Managing Director

ETF Advisors, LLC

Exchange-traded funds (ETFs) are the most important—and potentially the most versatile—financial instruments introduced since the debut of financial futures 30 years ago. We begin this chapter by explaining the origins of ETFs and some of their important features like intra-day trading on a stock exchange, creation and redemption of fund shares “in-kind,” and tax efficiency. We also compare the recently popular open-end ETFs to competitive products like closed-end funds, conventional mutual funds, HOLDRs, and Folios in terms of costs, applications, and tax efficiency.

# THE HISTORY AND STRUCTURE OF ETFS AND SOME COMPETITORS

Exchange-traded funds, referred to by friends and foes alike as "ETFs," are outstanding examples of step-by-step evolution of new financial instruments starting with a series of proto-products that led in a natural progres sion to the current generation of exchange-traded funds and set the stage for products yet to come.


# Portfolio Trading

The basic idea of trading an entire portfolio in a single transaction did not originate with the TIPS or SPDRS, which are the earliest successful examples of the modern portfolio-traded-as-a-share structure. The idea originated with what has come to be known as "portfolio trading" or "program trading." In the late 1970s and early 1980s, program trading was the then revolutionary ability to trade an entire portfolio, often a portfolio consisting of all the S&P 500 stocks, with a single order placed at a major brokerage firm. Some modest advances in electronic order entry technology at the NYSE and the Amex and the availability of large order desks at some major investment banking firms made these early portfolio or program trades possible. At about the same time, the introduction of S&P 500 index futures contracts at the Chicago Mercantile Exchange provided an arbitrage link between the futures contracts and the traded portfolios of stocks. It even became possible, in a trade called an exchange of futures for physicals (EFP) to exchange a stock portfolio position, long or short, for a stock index futures position, long or short. The effect of these developments was to make portfolio trading either in cash or futures markets an attractive activity for many trading desks and for many institutional investors.

As a logical consequence of these developments affecting large investors, there arose interest—one might even say insistent demand—for a readily tradable portfolio or basket product for smaller institutions and the individual investor. Before the introduction of "mini" contracts, futures contracts were relatively large in notional size. Even with "mini" contracts, the variation margin requirements for carrying a futures contract are cumbersome and relatively expensive for a small investor. Perhaps even more important, there are approximately ten times as many securities salespeople as futures salespeople. The need for a security—that is, an SEC-regulated portfolio product—that could be used by individual investors was apparent. One of the first such products introduced were the Index Participation Shares.

# Index Participation Shares (IPS)

The Index Participation Shares, known as "IPS," were a relatively simple, totally synthetic, proxy for the S&P 500 Index. While IPS on other indexes were also available, S&P 500 IPS were the most active. They began trading on the American Stock Exchange and the Philadelphia Stock Exchange in 1989. IPS traded with a level of activity that showed significant public interest, in spite of a lawsuit by the Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME) and the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) which charged that IPS were futures contracts. As futures contracts, they would be required by law to trade on a futures exchange regulated by the CFTC, not on a securities exchange. In spite of the cloud cast by this litigation, IPS volume and open interest began to grow.


The IPS were, candidly, much like a futures contract; but they were marginated and collateralized like stocks. Like futures, there was a short for every long and a long for every short. IPS were carried and cleared by the Options Clearing Corporation and they provided a return essentially identical to the long or short return on the underlying shares in the index with an appropriate quarterly credit for dividends on the long side and a debit for dividends on the short side.

Alas, success eluded the IPS. A federal court in Chicago found that the IPS were indeed illegal futures contracts and had to be traded on a futures exchange if they were traded at all. The stock exchanges began to close down IPS trading and investors were required to liquidate their IPS positions in an orderly manner.

While a number of efforts to find a replacement product for IPS that would pass muster as a security were underway in the United States, another effort achieved success first in Toronto. There, the TIPs (Toronto Stock Exchange Index Participations) were introduced.

# Toronto Stock Exchange Index Participations (TIPs)

TIPs were a warehouse receipt-based instrument designed to track the TSE-35 index and a later product tracked the TSE-100 index as well. The TSE-100 product was initially called HIPs. These products traded actively and attracted substantial investment from Canadians and from international indexing investors. TIPs were unique in their expense ratio. The ability of the trustee (State Street Bank) to loan out the stock in the TIPs portfolio and frequent demand for stock loans on shares of large companies in Canada led to what was, in effect, a negative expense ratio at times.

The TIPs were a victim of their own success. They proved costly for the Exchange and for some of its members who were unable to recover their costs from investors. Early in 2000, the Toronto Stock Exchange decided to get out of the portfolio share business and TIPs positions were liquidated or rolled into a Barclays Global Investors (BGI) 60 stock index share at the option of the TIPs holder. The BGI fund was relatively low cost, but not as low cost as the TIPs, so a large fraction of the TIPs shares were liquidated.

While the TIPs were flourishing in Toronto, two other portfolio share products were under development in the United States: Supershares and SPDRs.

# Supershares

Supershares, developed by Leland, O'Brien, Rubinstein Associates (LOR), were a complex product using both a trust and a mutual fund structure—one inside the other. Supershares were a high cost product, particularly after a fee was extracted to compensate the creators and sponsors. The complexity of the product, which permitted division of the Supershares into a variety of components, some with option characteristics, made sales presentations long and confusing for many customers. The Supershares never traded actively, and the trust was eventually liquidated.

# Standard & Poor's Depository Receipts (SPDRS)

SPDRS (pronounced "spiders") were developed by the American Stock Exchange (Amex) approximately in parallel with Supershares, although their introduction was deferred until after the Supershares were offered.2 SPDRs are the shares of a unit trust which holds an S&P 500 portfolio that, unlike the portfolios of most U.S. unit trusts, can be changed as the index changes. The reason for the selection of the unit trust structure was the Amex's concern for simplicity and costs. A mutual fund must pay the costs of a board of directors, even if the fund is very small. The Amex was uncertain of the demand for SPDRs and did not want to build a more costly infrastructure than was necessary. While SPDRs are the essence of simplicity relative to Supershares, they are more complex than TIPs and IPS, and the education process has been a long one. SPDRs traded reasonably well on the Amex in their earlier years, but only in the late 1990s did SPDRs asset growth become truly exponential. Investors began to look past the somewhat esoteric in-kind share creation and redemption process (used by market makers and large investors to acquire and redeem SPDRs in large blocks) and focused on the investment characteristics and tax efficiency of the SPDRs shares.

Today, the S&P 500 SPDRs have more assets than any other index fund except the Vanguard 500 mutual fund. The SPDRs account for more than one-third of ETF assets in the United States. Interestingly, however, from  $70\%$  to  $90\%$  of traditional U.S. index fund money goes into S&P 500 portfolios. Clearly, the interest in ETFs based on indexes other than the S&P 500 suggests that there is more to ETFs than an alternative to conventional index funds.

# World Equity Benchmark Shares (WEBS)—Renamed iShares MSCI Series

The WEBS, originally developed by Morgan Stanley, are important for two reasons. First, they are foreign index funds. More precisely, they are U.S.-based funds holding stocks issued by non-U.S.-based firms. Second, they are one of the earliest exchange-traded index products to use a mutual fund as opposed to a unit trust structure. The mutual fund structure has more investment flexibility and there are some other differences in dividend reinvestment and stock lending, but most of these differences are in the process of being eliminated. We would expect most new funds to use the mutual fund structure, but competitors' whispers that the SPDRs and other ETFs structured as unit trusts suffer from an evil affliction called "dividend drag" are gross exaggerations.

A product similar to WEBS was introduced on the NYSE at about the same time WEBS appeared on the Amex. For a variety of reasons (the most important of which were structural flaws in the product) these "Country Baskets" failed and the trust was liquidated.

In addition to WEBS, a variety of additional ETF products are now available. The Mid-Cap SPDRs (a unit trust run by the Bank of New York) actually came before WEBS, and the DIAMONDS (a unit trust based on the Dow Jones Index Industrial Average and run by State Street Bank) and the Nasdaq 100 (a unit trust run by the Bank of New York) were introduced later. The Select Sector SPDRs used a mutual fund structure similar to the WEBS and were introduced in late 1998. Of these products, the Nasdaq 100 and the Sector SPDRs deserve a closer look.

# NASDAQ 100 Index Tracking Stock (Trading Symbol QQQ)

In spite of the name, the Nasdaq 100 Trust, sponsored by Nasdaq, is not a tracking stock as the term is generally used in the United States—and, from a strictly technical point of view, it's not even a stock. The basic unit of trading, however, is a "share" and the Nasdaq 100 Trust, as a unit trust, is more like the original SPDR than most of the other currently traded ETFs. The reason for focusing on the Nasdaq 100 Trust is its spectacular success, partly as a result of a sound marketing effort by Nasdaq, but primarily because of the spectacular performance—until March, 2000—of stocks listed on the Nasdaq market. The Nasdaq 100, perhaps more than any of the other ETF products, illustrates the variety of applications for and reasons for investment in exchange-traded funds. The Nasdaq 100 Shares serve as a volatile trading vehicle on both the long and short side of the market and as a proxy for the technology sector. Heavy trading volume and narrow bid-asked spreads for small orders attracted both large and small traders and the growth in volume attracted more traders, leading to even more volume.

# Sector SPDRs

The Sector SPDRs, developed by Merrill Lynch, provide another interesting perspective on the ETF world. Although each stock in the S&P 500 is assigned to a Sector SPDR, the balance of investor interest has been very different from sector capitalization weights. Investor interest has been greatest in the Technology Sector SPDR, followed at a considerable distance by the Financial Sector SPDR and at a great distance by all the other sectors. These sector funds have served, at least initially, primarily as a mechanism for expressing a strongly held view about a particular segment of the market. In part because their relatively low share prices increase transaction costs for many investors, sector funds have not yet caught on in a major way as the basis for weighting a portfolio more heavily in favored sectors, or less heavily if the sector is relatively unattractive. The very slow start of the high cost iShares Dow Jones sector funds suggests a need for more information, education, and appropriate allocation tools to help individual investors and their advisors use sector funds effectively.

# BGI iShares Funds

Barclays Global Investors, a major institutional index portfolio manager, launched iShares in a bid to develop a retail branded family of financial products. Whether or not the extremely low expense ratio on the S&P 500 fund, which is part of the iShares offering and the former WEBS (for which BGI has served as investment advisor since inception) get special attention, many observers feel that BGI has yet to demonstrate that it can succeed in the ETF market. By early October 2001, BGI accounted for more than  $73\%$  of U.S.-based exchange-traded funds and about  $18\%$  of U.S. ETF assets. Most of these assets are in funds with expense ratios of 20 basis points or less.

# State Street Global Advisors streetTRACKS Funds

The original 500 SPDRs and the DIAMONDS were developed cooperatively by the Amex, outside counsel, and State Street; and the Sector SPDRs were developed with important participation by Merrill Lynch. The streetTRACKS Funds represent State Street's first solo ETF effort in the United States. BGI's strategy of cornering many branded benchmark index licenses left State Street with an unusual collection of indexes as the basis for its funds. All in all, State Street's recent U.S. effort has been mildly disappointing, but they have done much better in the launch of the Hong Kong TraHKers Fund and other funds for investors outside the United States.

# Nuveen Investments Fixed Income Funds and Selected Equity Index Funds

The focus of Nuveen's initial effort in index ETFs has been on the development and licensing of fund-friendly indexes as templates for its proposed index fund products. Nuveen attempts to develop funds which meet specific investor needs rather than launch a fund simply because an index happens to be available. Nuveen was the first advisor to file an exemptive request with the SEC to launch fixed-income index funds.

# ETF S AND OTHER TRADABLE BASKET PRODUCTS

While most readers think of the fund products described above as ETFs, various financial instruments, each referred to by some of its advocates as an exchange-traded fund, are designed to meet specific portfolio investment needs. In many cases, the needs met are practically identical; in other cases, they are quite different. In spite of some confusion about what the term ETF includes, most observers agree that a range of exchange-traded portfolio basket products compete for investors' dollars.

Our purpose in this section is to introduce the major categories of financial instruments which sometimes have been called "ETFs" or which compete with ETFs. We will appraise the features of each. Our objective is to provide a relatively straightforward comparison of features. The purpose of the comparison is not to suggest that one structure is always superior or that the emphasis should always be on competition between the products. In fact, folio customers have been important users of the fund-type ETFs described in the previous section and of HOLDRs which are described next.

# Closed-End Funds

Nuveen Investments began using the term "exchange-traded funds" for its closed-end municipal bond funds traded on the New York and American Stock Exchanges in the very early 1990s, several years before the first SPDRs began trading on the American Stock Exchange. The use of the name "exchange-traded funds" was selected to emphasize the fact that someone buying and selling these municipal bond fund shares enjoyed the investor protections afforded by investment company (fund) regulation and by the auction market on a major securities exchange. Interestingly, the intra-day trading convenience and trading cost reduction of the pooled portfolio structure and exchange trading for these closed-end funds was similar in many respects to the contribution of the pooled portfolio structure and exchange trading to the newer "open" exchange-traded funds, originating with the TIPs in Canada and the SPDRs in the United States.


Both these types of exchange-traded funds provide an efficient means to assemble and trade a portfolio of securities—in the case of the closed-end funds, recent offerings have been primarily municipal bond portfolios; in the case of the "open" ETFs, they have been primarily stock portfolios. Typically, both these vehicles are able to trade the components of their portfolios at narrower spreads and manage these portfolios at lower cost than an individual, an institutional manager of separate accounts, or the manager of a conventional "open-end" mutual fund. Limited liquidity in the municipal bond markets makes it especially difficult to manage a municipal bond portfolio with as high a degree of efficiency in an "open-end" portfolio structure as in a closed-end fund. Creation and redemption in-kind—in some respects the defining characteristic of "open" ETFs—is not yet practical in U.S. municipal bond markets.

Given the diversity and relative illiquidity of most individual municipal bond positions, the closed-end fund structure seems to be the most efficient choice for that market today. The relative increase in liquidity for the fund shares and the reduction in portfolio transaction costs available in a well-managed, closed-end municipal bond fund usually more than compensate for the occasional discount from net asset value associated with the fixed capitalization of a closed-end fund. Depending on an investor's objectives, the liquidity and cost advantages of the closed-end municipal bond fund may be as important as the cost and liquidity advantages of the newer "open" ETFs.

# "Open" Exchange-Traded Funds

The SEC requires that references to what we have been calling exchange-traded funds as open-end funds be made only in the context of a comparison with conventional open-end investment companies (mutual funds). We are about to make such a comparison so we will now drop the quotes around open, and fully qualify the limits of openness in such funds. Shares in open ETFs are issued and redeemed directly by the fund at their net asset value (NAV) only in creation unit aggregations, typically 50,000 fund shares or multiples of 50,000 shares. The shareholder who wants to buy or sell fewer than 50,000 shares may only buy and sell smaller lots on the secondary market at their current market price. The secondary market participant is dependent on competition among the exchange specialist, other market makers and arbitrageurs to keep the market price of the shares very near the intra-day value of the fund portfolio. The effectiveness of market forces in promoting tight bid asked spreads and fair pricing has been impressive. ETF shares have consistently traded very, very close to the value of the underlying portfolio in a contemporaneously priced market.


Before we move beyond the issue of share creation and redeemability to compare these new funds with conventional mutual funds in more detail, it is worth noting that the first open exchange-traded funds were not mutual funds. They were, as noted earlier, unit investment trusts (UITs) selected by the AMEX for simplicity and cost-saving reasons. The AMEX was concerned that the new "funds" might turn out to be very small, leaving the Exchange with the expenses of compensating a board of directors in perpetuity. In fact, the portfolios of the unit trust-based products have grown quite large. At the end of December 2000, the 500 SPDR would have been ranked twenty-first in size among mutual funds, just behind Janus Twenty and ahead of AimValue. The Nasdaq 100 Trust would have ranked twenty-third, ahead of Vanguard Windsor.

The differences between the SPDRs and Nasdaq 100 UIT structure and the open-end investment company structure used for most of the newer ETFs are not important to most investors in an equity index fund. Some providers of open ETFs structured as management investment companies have criticized the older UIT structures because dividends from their portfolio stocks cannot be equitized (i.e., reinvested in portfolio shares). The dividends must be retained as cash and invested, in effect, in money market instruments until the dividend payment is made.[5] Furthermore, securities in the UIT portfolios cannot be lent out to obtain securities lending income to help offset portfolio expenses. The impact of these differences is not material under most circumstances, but State Street Bank, trustee of the 500 SPDR and the DIAMONDS, has asked the Securities and Exchange Commission to permit a change in the rules of the trust to facilitate equitization of dividends and securities lending. There is every reason to believe that this application will be approved in time, making the equity index UIT ETFs and the investment company ETFs functionally equivalent for all practical purposes.[6] The UIT structure and the investment company structure share a broad range of similar characteristics, most of which are advantages relative to the traditional open-end mutual fund structure.

For the typical retail or even institutional investor, purchasing and selling ETF shares is the essence of simplicity. The trading rules and prac tices are those of the stock market. ETF shares are purchased and sold in the secondary market, much like stocks or shares of closed-end funds, rather than being purchased from the fund and resold to the fund, like conventional mutual fund shares.


Because they are traded like stocks, shares of ETFs can be purchased or sold any time during the trading day, unlike shares of most conventional mutual funds which are sold only at the 4:00 p.m. net asset value (NAV) as determined by the fund and applied to all orders received since the prior day's share trading deadline. While the opportunities for intra-day trading may not be important to every investor, they certainly have appeal to many investors during a period when there is concern about being able to get out of a position before the market close when prices are volatile.

Primary market transactions in ETF shares, that is, trades when shares are bought and redeemed with the fund itself as a party to the trade, consist of in-kind creations and redemptions in large size. For example, the SPDR and Nasdaq 100 creation aggregations are 50,000 fund shares, and creation/redemption occurs only in multiples of 50,000 shares. There have been several occasions when creation and redemption of fund shares has resulted in asset flows of $1 billion dollars or more in or out of the SPDR or the Nasdaq 100 Trust in a single day. Exchange specialists, market makers, and arbitrageurs buy ETF shares from the fund by depositing a stock portfolio and a cash balancing component that essentially match the fund in content and are equal in value to 50,000 ETF shares on the day the fund issues the shares. The same large market participants redeem fund shares by tendering them to the fund in 50,000 share multiples and receiving a stock portfolio plus or minus balancing cash equivalent in value to the 50,000 ETF shares redeemed. The discipline of possible creation and redemption at each day's market closing NAV is a critical factor in the maintenance of fund shares at a price very, very close to the value of the fund's underlying portfolio, not just at the close of trading, but intra-day. A proxy for intra-day net asset value per share is disseminated for each ETF throughout the trading day to help investors check the reasonableness of bids and offers on the market.[7]

An extremely important feature of the creation and, more particularly, the redemption process is that redemption-in-kind does more than provide an arbitrage mechanism to assure a market price quite close to net asset value. Redemption in kind also reduces the fund's transaction costs slightly and enhances the tax efficiency of the fund. While a conventional mutual fund can require shareholders to take a redemption payment in-kind rather than in cash for large redemptions, most funds are reluctant to do this, and most shareholders have fund positions consider- ably smaller than the 250,000 minimum usually required for redemption in-kind. As a consequence, most redemptions of conventional mutual fund shares are for cash, meaning that an equity fund faced with significant shareholder redemptions is required to sell shares of portfolio stocks, frequently shares that have appreciated from their original cost. When gains taken to obtain cash for redemptions are added to gains realized on merger stocks that are removed from the index for a premium over the fund's purchase price, many conventional index funds distribute substantial capital gains to their shareholders, even though the continuing shareholders who pay taxes on these distributions have made no transactions, and the fund, looked at from a longer perspective, has been a net buyer of most or all of its index's component securities.


The in-kind redemption process for exchange-traded funds enhances tax efficiency in a simple way. The lowest cost shares of each stock in the portfolio are delivered against redemption requests. In contrast to a conventional fund which would tend to sell its highest cost stocks first, leaving it vulnerable to substantial capital gains realizations when a portfolio company is acquired at a premium and exits the index and the fund, the lowest cost lot of stock in each company in the portfolio is tendered to ETF shareholders redeeming in multiples of 50,000 fund shares. The shares of stock in each company remaining in the portfolio have a relatively higher cost basis, which means that acquired companies generate smaller or no gains when they leave the index and are sold for cash by the fund.

One further feature of the existing exchange-traded funds which causes a degree of misunderstanding and which seems to create an expectation that all ETFs will be extremely low cost funds requires an explanation. First, the existing ETFs are all index funds. Index funds generally have lower management fees than actively-managed funds, whatever their share structure. Second, ETFs enjoy somewhat lower operating costs than their conventional fund counterparts. The principal reasons for lower costs are (1) the opportunity to have a somewhat larger fund because of the popularity of the exchange-traded fund structure, (2) slightly lower transaction costs due to in-kind deposits from and payments to buyers and redeemers in the primary market and, most importantly, (3) the elimination of the transfer agency function—that is, the elimination of shareholder accounting—at the fund level.

As all U.S. ETFs are "book entry only" securities, an exchange-traded fund in the United States has one registered shareholder: the Depository Trust Company (DTC). If you want a share certificate for a SPDR or QQQ position, you are out of luck. Certificates are not available. The only certificate is held by the Depository Trust Company, and the number of shares represented by that certificate is "marked to market" for increases and decreases in shares as creations and redemptions occur.

Shareholder accounting for ETFs is maintained at the investor's brokerage firm, rather than at the fund. This creates no problems for the shareholder, although it does have some significance for the distribution of exchange-traded funds. One of the traditional functions of the mutual fund transfer agent is to keep track of the salesperson responsible for the placement of a particular fund position, so that any ongoing payments based on 12b-1 fees or other marketing charges can be made to the credit of the appropriate salesperson. There is no way for the issuer of an ETF to keep track of salespeople because these fund positions do not carry the record keeping information needed to use the DTC Fund/SERV process. They are, in a word, just like shares of a stock—and a stock with no certificates at that. The elimination of the individual shareholder transfer agency function reduces operating costs by a minimum of five basis points and probably by much more in many cases. ETF expenses tend to reflect the cost savings on this function.

The trading price of an exchange-traded fund share will be subject to a bid-asked spread in the secondary market (although these are very narrow on most products) and a brokerage commission. A simple breakeven analysis divides the round-trip trading costs by the daily difference in operating expenses. Anyone planning to retain a reasonably large fund position for more than a short period of time and/or anyone who values the intraday purchase and sale features of the exchange-traded funds will find the combination of the lower expense ratio and greater flexibility make the ETF share more attractive than a conventional mutual fund share.

Powerful advantages notwithstanding, there are a few disadvantages in the exchange-traded fund format for some investors. An investor cannot be certain of his or her ability to buy or sell shares at a price no worse than net asset value without incurring some part or all of a trading spread and a commission. It is the trading spread in the secondary market which covers the costs of insulating the ongoing shareholder from the cost of in-and-out transactions by active traders. These transaction costs in open market ETF trades means that, even with lower fund expenses, certain small investors will not find ETFs as economical as traditional funds if they are in the habit of making periodic small investments. Since most conventional mutual funds take steps to refuse investments from in-and-out traders if they trade in and out too frequently, the transaction costs associated with ETFs are simply a more equitable allocation of these costs among various fund shareholders. A long-term investor, particularly a taxable long-term investor, will benefit greatly from the exchange-traded fund structure because in the long run that investor should enjoy lower fund expenses and a higher after-tax return than he would find in an otherwise comparable conventional fund. This allocation of costs and benefits is ironic given the only significant criticism which has been leveled at exchange-traded funds, i.e., that they encourage active trading. In fact, the long-term taxable investor enjoys the greatest benefits from the ETF structure. Even so, the ETF structure has probably reduced the active trader's costs as well, given the obstacles and special redemption fees these traders often incur when they use conventional funds.


As noted, all current open exchange-traded funds are equity index funds. As time goes by, there will be a wider variety of funds available. The introduction of fixed-income index funds, enhanced index funds, and ultimately, actively-managed funds, seems inevitable. It is in the advance from simple indexation with full replication of the index in the portfolio that the investment management company structure shows its greatest advantages over the open UIT structure because the latter structure does not provide a mechanism for anything beyond full replication of an index. The open-end management investment company structure permits a portfolio to differ from the structure of an index fairly easily if the index structure is not consistent with the diversification requirements that allow the fund to qualify as a regulated investment company (RIC) for tax purposes. The UIT structure provides for replication of an index with limited variations based on rounding share positions and limited timing adjustments of index replicating transactions by advancing or deferring them for a few days. As in most evolutionary developments, whether in biology or finance, there is more than one way to accomplish an objective.

Alternative portfolio or basket structures differ both from the UIT and the exchange-traded investment management company. These other structures have their own unique features. Foremost among these are HOLding company Depository Receipts, (HOLDRs), a structure pioneered by Merrill-Lynch, and Folios, which have been introduced by a number of firms that would otherwise be characterized primarily as deep discount brokers. Both HOLDRs and Folios are unmanaged baskets of securities which may have an initial structure based on an index, a theme, or just a diversification policy.

# HOLding Company Depository Receipts (HOLDRs)

HOLDRs use a grantor trust structure which makes them similar to the open ETFs discussed above in that additional HOLDRs shares can be created and existing HOLDRs can be redeemed. The creation unit aggregation for the open ETF management company structures is typically 50,000 fund shares and the minimum trading unit on the secondary market is a single fund share. In contrast, the creation unit and the minimum trading unit in HOLDRs is generally 100 shares. Most brokerage firms will not deal in fractional shares or odd lots of HOLDRs. An investor can buy and sell HOLDRs in the secondary market or an existing HOLDRs position can be redeemed (exchanged for its specific underlying stocks). A new HOLDRs position can be created by simply depositing the stocks behind the 100-share HOLDRs unit with the Bank of New York.[9]


The creation/redemption fee for HOLDRs will generally be roughly similar in relative magnitude to the comparable fee on investment company ETFs and the pricing principles and arbitrage pricing constraints operate in a similar way. To the extent that one of the stocks in a HOLDRs basket performs poorly and the investor wants to use the loss on that stock to offset gains elsewhere, the HOLDRs can be taken apart and reassembled without affecting the tax status of any shares not sold. The ability to realize a loss on an individual position may give the HOLDRs structure a slight tax advantage over the investment company-based ETFs. On the other hand, unlike the redemption in-kind of the shares of an open ETF, the HOLDRs structure does not permit elimination of a low-cost position in the HOLDRs portfolio without realization of the gain by the investor.

An investor who maintains an account at Merrill Lynch will probably be able to obtain good tax reporting for HOLDRs positions. An investor transferring an account or carrying a HOLDRs position elsewhere may find tax preparation cumbersome and time consuming.

The first HOLDRs were based on the split-up of Telebras into 12 separate companies in mid-1998. They were designed to provide a single vehicle to absorb the split-off companies much as earlier unit trusts were designed to absorb the component pieces of AT&T at the time of the court-mandated divestiture of the regional operating companies. The Telebras HOLDRs traded an average of over 700,000 shares per day in the first half of 2001. Subsequent HOLDRs baskets were created initially out of 20 securities in each of a number of relatively narrowly defined industries and, more recently, out of a larger number of companies with various investment characteristics.

The principal disadvantages of HOLDRs are that they lack the indefinite life of an investment company and there is no provision for adding positions to offset attrition through acquisitions of basket com ponents by other companies. No HOLDRs component that disappears in a cash merger or bankruptcy can be replaced in the HOLDRs basket. If some stocks do well and others do poorly, there is no mechanism for rebalancing positions. There is a provision in some of the HOLDRs trusts that once the number of stocks represented in the HOLDRs portfolio drops below a certain level, the trust will be dissolved and the remaining shares will be delivered to the holders of HOLDRs in proportion to their ownership. The thematic nature of many of the HOLDRs baskets reflects this relatively temporary structure, though the Telebras HOLDRs and many of the recent broadly diversified portfolios have a longer term orientation.


The HOLDRs share one very important characteristic with the index ETFs: It is frequently less costly to trade the basket in the form of HOLDRs than it is to trade the individual shares, particularly for a small-to mid-sized investor who might be trading odd lots in many of the basket components if HOLDRs or ETFs were unavailable.

HOLDRs also feature a variation on a front-end load in their initial public offering (IPO). Once the HOLDRs are trading in the secondary market, additional HOLDRs can be created and redeemed at relatively low cost. The IPO structure may turn out to be an important feature of HOLDRs. If HOLDRs can continue to be launched in environments less favorable to the IPO structure, they may have a lasting role in the financial engineer's repertoire of financial instruments.

# Folios

In contrast to the other ETF variations and competitors described here, Folios are not standardized products nor are they investment companies or some kind of trust. They are baskets of stocks that can be modified one position at a time or traded with a single order through a brokerage firm. The firms which advocate and provide Folio baskets for trading do provide semi-standardized baskets—in some cases based on indexes, and in other cases based on a simple diversification rule. In practice, however, each investor's implementation of the Folio basket may be slightly different.

An investor may have $20,000 to invest. Upon examination of the group of "prefabricated" Folios suggested by the firm she trades with, she may decide she likes a specific basket of 40 stocks. The investor can choose how many shares of each stock she would like to buy or she can request a customized basket prepared by the firm and giving her an "appropriate" number of whole and sometimes fractional shares of each stock in the selected basket. She can modify the basket immediately—or later—until she finds a mix that matches her needs and inclinations.

Because Folio baskets will not be standardized, Folios cannot be traded like fund shares or like HOLDRS. Each of the stocks in a Folio will trade separately. While the brokerage firm can provide low-cost commissions and even the opportunity to execute trades against its other customer trades at selected times during the day, if the basket does not trade as a standardized basket, the investor will miss some of the transaction cost advantages which traders in standardized basket shares often enjoy.

A tax advantage of Folios over investment companies in certain circumstances is similar to a tax feature of HOLDRs. An investor can sell one position out of a Folio to take a loss and use that loss to offset gains obtained elsewhere—outside the Folio basket. In contrast, a fund taxed as a regulated investment company cannot pass losses through to shareholders. If the fund experiences large losses, an investor can take a loss on the fund shares by selling the share position; but losses on an individual portfolio component are not available to the investor who continues to hold the shares as a passthrough. In a reasonably bullish market environment, the ability of the UIT or management company ETF to modify its portfolio with creations and redemptions without taxable gain realizations will probably be more important to an individual investor than the ability to take specific losses in either HOLDRs or Folios. Other market environments may make the selected loss realization opportunity of the HOLDRs or Folios more valuable.

Folios, like HOLDRs, can be difficult from a tax accounting perspective, although all the Folio providers offer a service whereby careful entry of the cost of each position delivered into the account and automatic entry of positions purchased and sold in the account can be translated into a relatively simple schedule of gains and losses, suitable for attachment to the investor's tax return. An important competitive advantage of FolioFN compared to some other purveyors of basket products is the combination of its ability to provide and carry fractional share positions and a portfolio management and reporting system designed for use by independent advisors working with investors.

Folios have been criticized for the tendency of their promoters to minimize the true costs of acquiring and holding a Folio basket. While the promoters of Folios provide tools for measuring diversification effects of changes in the portfolio to realize losses or to make a change in the composition of the basket, the Folio baskets lack the inherent discipline of a product which is modified in response to a change in an index or in response to a decision by a portfolio manager. Investment managers and index publishers make mistakes and bad decisions, but they are unlikely to let a portfolio drift from neglect, as could easily happen with an unsupervised Folio basket. We expect Folios to become primarily a vehicle for advisors working with clients rather than a service for the on- line trader who trades his own account. Folios will use ETFs like stocks in the construction of Folio accounts.


In contrast to the ETFs' fund structure, there is no "tax-realization-free" mechanism for reducing the impact of a very successful position in either HOLDRs or Folios. In the regulated investment company structures (exchange-traded unit trusts or funds), tax rules would limit the size of any single stock to  $25\%$  of the assets of the fund under most circumstances. Reductions in the commitment to a particular position in a regulated investment company with redemptions in-kind might be obtainable without realization of taxable gains. This would not be possible for very successful positions underlying HOLDRs or for components of a Folio. Basket mechanisms that do not offer a way to reduce a large, successful position without capital gains realization force the investor to choose between tax deferral and diversification.

In the long run, Folios are more likely to be co-opted by specialized investment managers than they are to succeed in the format in which they were first introduced. Without an increase in fees charged to the individual customer or substantial income from sale of their investors' order flow, it seems unlikely that the retail, discount brokerage Folio service is an economically viable business model. Nonetheless, the Folio structure and flexibility is intriguing. While the initial product probably tried to take some aspects of do-it-yourself portfolio management too far, Folios can be an excellent vehicle for an advisor serving individual investors.

# A Side-by-Side Comparison of Tradable Basket Products 10

Exhibit 22.1 provides an eclectic comparison of the mutual fund-style and UIT-style versions of open exchange-traded funds and conventional mutual funds to the other basket products we have discussed. Most of the items on this comparison table are relatively straightforward and readily understandable from the previous text, but several items do require some discussion. First, these comparisons are based on the current product offerings in each category. At present, all open ETFs and open UITs are based on equity indexes. The lack of active management is virtually inherent in the open UIT, but there is reason to believe that open mutual fund-type ETFs will be able to serve as the vehicle for enhanced index funds and actively-managed funds in the future. Active management is also compatible with the closed-end funds, but not with the HOLDRs. Actively-managed Folios become the equivalent of separate accounts, something very different from all the other basket products.

EXHIBIT 22.1 Basket Product Comparisons

<table><tr><td>Feature/Product Structure</td><td>OpenETFs</td><td>OpenUITs</td><td>ConventionalMutual Funds</td><td>ClosedETFs</td><td>HOLDRs</td><td>Folios</td></tr><tr><td>Creation of Shares—primary market</td><td>In-kind deposit</td><td>In-kind deposit</td><td>Cash deposit with fund</td><td>IPO</td><td>IPO/in-kinddeposit</td><td>NA</td></tr><tr><td>Purchase of Shares—secondary market</td><td>Open market purchase</td><td>Open market purchase</td><td>NA</td><td>Open market purchase</td><td>Open market purchase</td><td>Open market purchase</td></tr><tr><td>Sale of Shares—secondary market</td><td>Open market sale</td><td>Open market sale</td><td>NA</td><td>Open market sale</td><td>Open market sale</td><td>Open market sale</td></tr><tr><td>Redemption of Shares—primary market</td><td>In-kindredemption</td><td>In-kindredemption</td><td>Cashredemption</td><td>NA</td><td>In-kindredemption</td><td>NA</td></tr><tr><td>Underlying portfolio structure(available today)</td><td>Index</td><td>Index</td><td>Index ormanaged</td><td>Managed</td><td>Preset basket</td><td>Investor&#x27;s choice</td></tr><tr><td>Tax structure</td><td>RIC</td><td>RIC</td><td>RIC</td><td>RIC</td><td>Structure istax transparent</td><td>No structure</td></tr><tr><td>Tax-efficiency factors</td><td>Redemptionin-kind</td><td>Redemptionin-kind</td><td>Cashredemption</td><td>Cashredemption</td><td>Separable losses</td><td>Separable losses</td></tr><tr><td>Investor tax-efficiency rating</td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>5</td><td>4</td><td>3</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>Effect of structure on shareholder&#x27;s trading cost</td><td>Usually reduces</td><td>Usually reduces</td><td>Usually reduces</td><td>Usually reduces</td><td>Usually reduces</td><td>No effect exceptdiscount brokerage</td></tr><tr><td>Investor&#x27;s Trading cost rating</td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>2</td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>3</td></tr><tr><td>Shareholder attention required</td><td>Minimaldividendreinvestment</td><td>Minimaldividendreinvestment</td><td>Minimaldividendreinvestment</td><td>Minimaldividendreinvestment</td><td>Dividend reinvestmentprincipal reinvestmenttax loss sales andreplacements significant</td><td>Dividend reinvestmentprincipal reinvestmenttax loss sales andreplacements significant</td></tr></table>

Ratings  $1 =$  best,  $5 =$  worst. See text for discussion.

In assigning tax-efficiency ratings, we have placed significantly greater value on the redemption in-kind feature of the open ETFs and open UITs than on the separable loss feature available in Folios with no particular change and in HOLDRs through the exchange of the HOLDR for the basket of underlying securities followed by realization of the loss, re-establishment of the position that incurred the loss after the wash sale period is past and reconstitution of the HOLDR—a relatively complex and non-user-friendly process.

Closed-end funds are rated higher than conventional mutual funds on tax-efficiency because they are characterized by a closed portfolio and do not face the forced realization of gains which can come about through cash redemptions in an open-end mutual fund.

The investor's trading cost ratings are based on the advantages associated with trading a basket at the share level versus transacting separately in all the securities making up the basket. All of the standardized ETFs are ranked highly because trading in the composite share should be more efficient than trading in the underlying positions separately. It is certainly possible to differentiate among individual products in terms of the cost of trading the product or trading the underlying securities separately, but the difference is more related to the nature of the underlying market and the quality of the market in the basket product than it is on anything systematically related to the product structure. The conventional mutual funds are rated slightly below the exchange-traded products other than the unstructured Folios on the assumption that, on average, a redemption charge or other obstacles to short-term trading will increase an investor's costs of trading.[11] Folios are rated least favorably on trading cost simply because they do not provide any of the advantages associated with trading the other products as portfolios or baskets. Even when the transactions in a Folio are aggregated, each stock is traded separately. None of the Folio providers have reached a size that permits them to match and offset many customer orders to eliminate the bid-asked spread.

The topic that probably requires the most consideration for long-term investors is the shareholder attention required to use each product effectively. Any basket or portfolio product will typically be less risky than a random collection of a few of its component securities, and any basket product will provide at least a degree of diversification, though some of the more specialized HOLDRs baskets or, for that matter, sector funds provide only minimal internal diversification. Nonetheless, these basket products are generally designed to require minimal share- holder attention from day to day and even from year to year. Most, for example, provide either automatic dividend reinvestment or let an investor make a variety of arrangements for automatic reinvestment of the dividends with the brokerage firm holding the account.


HOLDRs and Folios require somewhat greater investor (or manager) attention than the conventional fund or exchange-traded fund products for at least two reasons: First, to the extent that any of the companies in the HOLDRs or Folios are taken over in a cash acquisition, the shares will automatically be turned into cash and the shareholder will have to deal with reinvestment of the principal. Also, both these less structured products provide for their variety of tax-efficiency by permitting tax loss sales of individual securities. Folios, which are marketed principally as a way to take advantage of the automatic diversification a portfolio of stocks provides, require some kind of replacement or re-balancing activity to maintain a useful degree of diversification. With the other products, either a portfolio manager or the process for weighting or re-weighting the index and insuring regulated investment company diversification compliance in the fund will retain a minimal level of diversification without action by the investor or an advisor employed to manage the investor's position.

# TAXES AND TAX EFFICIENCY IN ETFS AND THEIR COMPETITORS

Advocates of conventional mutual funds, exchange-traded funds, and separate stock portfolios (including HOLDRs and Folios) have engaged in extensive discussions about the relative tax-efficiency of their respective approaches to equity portfolio management. The purpose of this section is to codify appropriate information for investors who may be justifiably confused by what they have been hearing or reading from diverse sources. While we have attempted to summarize our conclusions on the relative tax-efficiency of the three portfolio structures in Exhibit 22.2, the answer to the question, "Which way of holding a portfolio of common stocks offers the greatest tax-efficiency?" is still, of course, "It depends on investment results."

Discussing the principal tax issues as we work down Exhibit 22.2, our objective is to help investors understand which tax features are most important as the first step in making an informed choice, given their personal circumstances. In many instances, the appropriate choice will depend on holdings (or gains and losses) outside the fund or basket under consideration. As with any tax issue, investors should consult their personal tax advisors. We offer this material only to help investors approach the tax issues of interest to them, not as tax advice.

EXHIBIT 22.2 Factors Affecting Tax Efficiency of Mutual Funds, ETFs, and Separate Accounts (inc. HOLDRs, Folios, etc.)

<table><tr><td></td><td>Mutual Funds</td><td>Exchange-Traded Funds</td><td>Separate Accounts (inc. HOLDRs, Folios)</td></tr><tr><td>Deductibility of investment management expenses</td><td>+</td><td>+</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td>Passthrough of losses</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>+</td></tr><tr><td>Passthrough of STG (in character)</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>+</td></tr><tr><td>Deferral of STG</td><td>-</td><td>+</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td>Deferral of LTG (with changing portfolio)</td><td>o</td><td>+</td><td>o</td></tr><tr><td>Step-up of basis at death</td><td>o</td><td>+</td><td>+</td></tr><tr><td>Appreciated shares for charitable gifts</td><td>-</td><td>o</td><td>+</td></tr><tr><td>Tax impact of stocks acquired for cash in mergers</td><td>-</td><td>+</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td>Successful portfolio—little turnover</td><td>o</td><td>+</td><td>o</td></tr><tr><td>Successful portfolio—high turnover</td><td>-</td><td>+</td><td>-</td></tr><tr><td>Mediocre portfolio</td><td>o</td><td>o</td><td>+</td></tr><tr><td>Capital gain/loss accounting</td><td>+</td><td>+</td><td>check with advisor</td></tr></table>

Key: + Best o Okay
- Worst
STG Short-Term Capital Gains
LTG Long-Term Capital Gains

# Deductibility of Investment Management Expenses

As suggested by the  $+$ s in the fund columns of Exhibit 22.2, any investment management expenses incurred by the fund are deductible from the fund's income before anything is distributed to shareholders. This expense deductibility holds for both conventional mutual funds and exchange-traded funds. An investor who pays any investment advisory expenses, such as a wrap fee which covers advice as well as replaces stock trading commissions in connection with HOLDRs or Folios, will not be able to deduct those expenses for tax purposes unless they and other miscellaneous itemized deductions exceed  $2\%$  of the investor's adjusted gross income. The magnitude of the amounts involved is relatively easy to estimate, but it is probably not large enough to be a material consideration for most investors if the only funds used are low-cost index ETFs. On the other hand, higher fees embedded in actively-managed ETFs or conventional funds may be tax-advantaged relative to a separate, non-deductible, or less deductible advisory fee.


# Passthrough of Losses

Here, the separate portfolio investor is at an advantage over the investor who purchases shares in a fund. If some of the stocks in the underlying portfolio go up and some go down, the mutual fund and exchange-traded fund cannot pass net losses through to the shareholder. In contrast, the separate account, HOLDRs and Folio/basket product shareholder owns each of the securities in the basket product, and can (perhaps with effort and some modest expense in the case of the HOLDRs) decompose the portfolio, take losses on positions that have experienced losses, and let gains run. Of course, the funds' losses cannot be passed through to the shareholder for offset against gains on positions outside the portfolio. The only way to take a capital loss on a fund is to sell the fund shares.

# Passthrough of Short-Term Gains with Character Retained

In the taxation of regulated investment companies, any net short-term gains are reported and taxed as ordinary income as opposed to short-term gains in the fund investor's tax returns. An investor with realized or unrealized long-term or short-term capital losses in other investments would be unable to offset short-term capital gains from distributions made by a fund against capital losses outside the fund. The investor in HOLDRs, Folios or other separate stock basket products could reflect realized short-term stock gains on his tax return and offset them with capital losses realized from another source. Short-term capital gains are unlikely to be a material issue for most equity funds. Unless a fund manager is making extensive use of initial public offerings (new issues) to spike performance or assumes most fund shareholders do not benefit from the lower tax rate on long-term capital gains, realized net short-term gains in an equity fund that is more than a year old are improbable, unless the fund is an index fund based on an index that is very fund-unfriendly.[12]

# Deferral of Short-Term Gains

Whenever deferral of a portfolio capital gain (short term or long term) is desired, the ETFs stand out relative to both conventional mutual funds and the separate portfolio products for the simple reason that an astute ETF portfolio manager should be able to redeem out enough of the portfolio's net capital gains so that the value of gains can be retained, untaxed, in the fund even if the portfolio is changed. Barring the presence of offsetting losses, holders of a conventional mutual fund or a separate portfolio product will be taxed at their full marginal ordinary income tax rate on any short-term capital gains. Holders of mutual fund shares will not be able to offset the short-term gain with capital losses outside the fund because the short-term gain will be taxed as an ordinary income dividend. Again, net realized short-term gains should be rare in most equity fund portfolios.


# Deferral of Long-Term Capital Gains

Each of these vehicles should be able to defer long-term gains—as long as there are no changes made in the portfolio. If changes are made and resulting realized long-term gains are likely to be material, the ETF once again stands out as the vehicle of choice. The investor who owns any other non-fund portfolio products may be able to offset long-term gains with losses on other components of the portfolio or other positions outside the portfolio, but this process offers less flexibility than the ETF that defers the gains, but permits a very wide range of changes in the portfolio—including complete portfolio turnover without realization of taxable gains at the extreme.

# Step-Up of Cost Basis of Stocks at Death as a Meaningful Feature of the Portfolio Structure

Here both the ETFs and the separate stock portfolio products can shine. Other things equal, the very long-term holder of an ETF should have most of a lifetime's return in the form of unrealized capital gains. With astute management, the holder of a separate stock portfolio might approach this ideal, but rating the separate portfolio as equal to the ETF is probably generous. Under the assumption that the investor has held a number of stocks for most of the period from initiation of the position until death, the heirs of the holder of the conventional mutual fund are unlikely to avoid as much capital gains tax as ETF or separate portfolio investors because more capital gains will have been realized, distributed, and taxed over time in the conventional fund.

# Appreciated Shares Usable for Charitable Gifts

Here the separate portfolio products triumph. With individual stock positions that can be separated, the one with the greatest appreciation—i.e., the one with the lowest relative cost basis—can be donated to charity to maximize the deductible donation without paying capital gains tax on the gain. In the case of the ETF, the stock positions are combined or averaged so the appreciation of the fund shares will be approximately the average capital gain return on the portfolio as opposed to the separate account portfolio where the most appreciated security would be the one chosen for a charitable deduction. With a conventional mutual fund, more capital gains likely will have been realized so that some of the appreciation of the shares will have been taxed previously. Over time, the tax basis on conventional fund shares may be increased by reinvestment of realized gains, making the conventional fund shares poor candidates for in-kind charitable contributions.


# Tax Impact of Low-Basis Stock Acquired by Another Company for Cash

Here the dominant portfolio format is the exchange-traded fund under the assumption that the portfolio manager will be able to redeem out the appreciated stock in-kind. If the stock is redeemed out in-kind rather than sold, no gain is realized at the fund level and, thus, nothing is distributed to shareholders and taxed. In contrast, of course, the conventional mutual fund and the separate portfolio product would have experienced taxable capital gains with fewer opportunities to shelter or defer them.

