---
title: Preface
parent_directory: X. Quantitative Trading/Financial Trading and Investing
formatted: 2025-12-20 07:08:00 PM
formatter_model: claude-sonnet-4
cli-tool: claude-code
primary_tags:
  - financial trading textbook
  - trading course introduction
secondary_tags:
  - market microstructure
  - risk management
  - behavioral finance
cssclasses: academia
---

# Preface

There is an apocryphal story told in certain chess circles about a teenage boy that simultaneously challenged the great Russian chess champion Alexander Alekhine and the Russo-German Grandmaster Efim Bogoljubov. The boy had separately approached each of the two grandmasters to play games of correspondence chess. The two champions, without knowledge of the other's participation, accepted the boy's offers to play for money, with odds favorable to the boy. The chess greats, who happened to be friends, discovered the scheme in a much later conversation, and realized that the boy was merely acting as an intermediary between them, relaying moves between the two grandmasters. The boy, because of his favorable odds, was assured of netting a profit on the intermediation regardless of who won the match.

Intermediation is the keystone of the world financial system. While much essential financial decision-making focuses on the time and risk dimensions of investing, intermediation is the process that actually moves capital from businesses, institutions, and individuals with surplus funds to those that need them. Trading is central to this intermediation. Some traders have great expertise in valuation, quantitative analysis, or other investments tools, and serve important roles in this intermediation process. Other traders merely serve as intermediaries, quoting their prices based on the trading moves played by the experts. Their roles and opportunities are considerable as well. Regardless, all traders need to understand their markets and manage their risks. This is the objective to which Financial Trading and Investing strives.

Securities trading is a very broad topic, and merits far more discussion than could ever fit into a single volume. There are thousands of books on trading, all-too-many of which present their authors' opinions on "how to trade your way to riches." There are quite a few outstanding books that focus on fairly narrow aspects of trading, such as market microstructure, algo trading, risk management or day-trading, etc. Financial Trading and Investing seeks to provide a broad overview to trading and investing, much as any standard investments text. However, the focus of this text is on trading, trading institutions, markets, and the institutions that participate in, facilitate, and regulate trading activities. This book is not intended to replace a standard investments text. It does not introduce important general investment concepts such as portfolio theory and fundamental analysis; it focuses on trading. However, material on these extra topics is available on the text web site at https://www.elsevier.com/books-and-journals/book-companion/9780323909556 and https://educate.elsevier.com/9780323909556.

Financial Trading and Investing is intended to serve as a primary textbook for a university course focusing on trading. Most but not all students in a trading course will have already had some exposure to introductory finance or investments courses. The book should also be useful in a number of other courses, including those dealing with general investments,

securities law, and classes based on student managed funds, in some cases, perhaps as a secondary text. The text discusses recent, important, newsworthy, and controversial trading tactics such as algo trading, dark liquidity pools, late trading, co-location, high frequency trading, and flash orders. It explains a number of important valuation and hedging techniques. It introduces some of the most recent market and technology advances and innovations such as Designated Market Makers (DMMs), Supplemental Liquidity Providers (SLPs), SuperMontage, ATSs, and ECNs. The book explains the "plumbing" of securities markets, including clearing and settlement, along with central counterparties.

When I began teaching courses in trading years ago at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, enrollment in my classes was quite diverse. Students included those with typical undergraduate and MBA-level business studies backgrounds, with one or a few finance courses behind them (sometimes, but not always including one in investments), as well as a single course in statistics (typically) and perhaps calculus. Within a few years, students majoring in financial engineering or quantitative finance began to outnumber other students. These students had stronger quantitative backgrounds, but often grasped few institutional details and sometimes required extra patience due to their verbal skills. The most difficult students to accommodate were often doctoral students in technical programs, including engineering, physics, math, and computer science. These students were superb, but lacked any academic background in business or finance, and had very serious reasons for enrolling in my courses. I found that the best way to accommodate such a broad array of students was to assume that they had limited or no academic backgrounds in finance and might need refreshers in statistics, linear algebra, and calculus, though the mathematics refreshers were clearly not necessary for doctoral students. Regardless, I wrote the book to accommodate students with limited academic backgrounds, but who were seriously interested in trading.

While coverage in my own trading course is sequenced by the ordering of the chapters, the text is designed to be very flexible. The sequence of course coverage need not correspond with chapter ordering in the text. Most chapters in this text can be presented without significant reliance on preceding chapters. For example, many instructors would prefer their class readings in behavioral finance (Chapter 11) and market efficiency (Chapter 12) to take place early in their courses. Practically any ordering of chapters is possible, though Chapter 1 is the most logical starting point and readers unfamiliar with Black-Scholes should familiarize themselves with the Appendix to Chapter 7 before proceeding to the remainder of Chapter 7 and to Chapter 9. In addition, readers might feel more comfortable reading Chapter 2 before Chapters 3 and 4, and Chapters 4 and 5 before Chapter 13. In general, the text is organized as follows:

1. Chapters 1 through 6: Introduction to trading, trading mechanisms, clearing and settlement, regulation, and market microstructure  
2. Chapters 7 through 10: Risk, arbitrage, hedging, risk management, and performance evaluation  
3. Chapters 11 through 13: Behavioral aspects of trading and investing, market efficiency, and market abuses and failure

Many trading courses implement a software or internet-based trading simulation such as FTS, Rotman Interactive Trader, or TraderEx. This book was designed for use as a primary text in such learning environments. In fact, integration of simulation packages into

the trading course has played a key role in the development of this book, and close to a third of class time in my own course is dedicated to simulations. The book has ancillary materials to aid in the presentation and analysis of cases and demonstrations from these simulations.

In addition to the simulation-based ancillary materials, which are located at the book's student companion site at https://www.elsevier.com/books-and-journals/book-companion/9780323909556 and instructor resources at https://educate.elsevier.com/9780323909556, the text has several other pedagogical features. First, each chapter provides a number of exercises, to which detailed solutions are offered at the end of the text. There are a number of appendices, both to chapters and at the end of the text. For example, text appendices review basic statistics and mathematics concepts that are most useful to traders, particularly in the measurement and management of risk. The web-based ancillary materials include additional questions and problems that can be used for in-class discussions or exams. Additional discussion on the presentations of concepts and integration with simulation packages are offered there as well.

I welcome your comments and suggestions regarding this book. I can be contacted by e-mail at jtleall@jtleall.com or by using contact information available on my web page at http://www.jtleall.com.

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

I am fortunate to have taught a number of excellent students who have offered many suggestions and corrections on chapter drafts for this book and its second edition. Several colleagues, friends, and reviewers made helpful contributions, including T.J. Wu, Tina Prodromou, Peter Knopf, Anthony Joseph, and Iman Palit. I am especially grateful to Lynda S. Livingston and Vassilios Gargalas, who provided many particularly helpful comments and ideas. Stan Wakefield and editors and staff at Elsevier, including Scott Bentley, Gayathri S, Anusha Sambamoorthy, Katey Birtcher and Chris Hockaday, were essential in bringing the book and this third edition to fruition. In addition, a number of anonymous reviewers were most helpful. Of course, my lovely wife Anne, who no longer requires that I work one day a week, and Emily, who had been such a delightfully pleasant adolescent, and now lives in my basement, always boost my productivity and morale.