---
aliases:
tags:
key_concepts:
parent_directory:
cssclasses: academia
title: Valuation of ESG and Digital Initiatives
linter-yaml-title-alias: Valuation of ESG and Digital Initiatives
---

# Valuation of ESG and Digital Initiatives

As we write this book at the beginning of 2020, two items on any executive's agenda are noteworthy for their emerging importance in creating value and their slipperiness when it comes to valuing them. One is managing the intertwined elements of environmental, social, and governance (ESG) concerns. The other is grappling with the myriad manifestations of technological improvement or transformation commonly referred to as "digital."

The principles of corporate valuation do not include simple prescriptions for assigning values to various approaches to ESG or individual digital assets or strategies. Today, for even the most proficient analyst seeking a corporate valuation, there is only so much that can be done with these elusive elements. Many services publish various ESG ratings, for example, but researchers have found that the ratings are uncorrelated across different services, because work is still in progress on how to identify robust metrics of their success.

This chapter offers instead a way to think about how to value strategies and decisions related to ESG and digital initiatives. Our view is that companies should focus on the few areas that make a difference in their industry—for example, water consumption for beverage makers, supply chain management for apparel companies, or carbon emissions for many industries. It's also important, particularly at times of rapid technological change, to fix a gimlet eye on the risks of embracing—or ignoring—trends big and small. In each case, we recommend trying out the basic principles of valuation to establish a foundation for measuring outcomes, combined with gathering data to improve their application in the future.

# A COMMON FRAMEWORK

Before we dive into the details of ESG and digital valuation, it's worth pointing out that valuing these strategies or projects follows the same principles that apply to all investment decisions: use discounted cash flows, and compare scenario cash flows with a base case. Often, what is most critical for this analysis is the definition of the base case.

Sometimes executives argue that hard-to-quantify investments are necessary because they are "strategic," or that their benefits can't be measured. This is rarely the case. The logic error is often in defining the base case. Take the decision by a bank to invest in a mobile-banking app. How would you quantify the value of this investment? The key is the base case. If all of a bank's competitors have mobile apps and the bank doesn't invest in one, its market share will likely fall over time as it loses customers (or fails to attract new ones). Therefore, the base case would be a decline in profits and cash flows, not stable profits and cash flows.

Companies are often reluctant to create business-as-usual projections that show declines in profits and cash flows. Yet such declines are what will most often happen when companies avoid change. Companies must become comfortable with declining-base cases; if they don't, they will have difficulty quantifying the value of many investments in ESG and digital. Quantifying the value is essential to making smart choices. It allows you to compare these initiatives against other investments that may be competing for scarce resources. And as in the example of the mobile-banking app, it may cause you to think about how much to invest in particular initiatives. It's not good enough to look at advancing technology or increasing demand for sustainability and act blindly, based on an uninformed sense of obligation to keep up with outside forces.

# ENVIRONMENTAL, SOCIAL, AND GOVERNANCE (ESG) CONCERNS

Every business is deeply intertwined with environmental, social, and governance (ESG) concerns:

- Environmental criteria include the energy a company takes in and the waste it discharges, the resources it needs, and the consequences for living beings as a result. Some of the most significant measures are carbon emissions and climate change.
- Social criteria address the relationships a company has and the reputation it fosters with people and institutions in the communities in which it does business. Important criteria include labor relations, diversity, and inclusion.
- Governance is the internal system of practices, controls, and procedures a company adopts in order to govern itself, make effective decisions, comply with the law, and meet the needs of external stakeholders.

These individual elements are themselves intertwined. For example, social criteria overlap with environmental criteria and governance when companies seek to comply with environmental laws and broader societal concerns about sustainability.

The combining of these reputation and business risks and benefits has more executives thinking and acting on ESG in a proactive way. As we discussed in Chapter 1, the U.S. Business Roundtable in August 2019 issued a statement strongly affirming businesses' connection with a broad range of stakeholders, including customers, employees, suppliers, communities, and shareholders.[2] Investors are becoming more interested in a company's ESG performance, and ESG-oriented investing is on the rise. ESG-related investment funds now top 30 trillion—up 68 percent since 2014 and tenfold since 2004.[3] The acceleration has been driven by heightened social, governmental, and consumer attention to the broader impact of corporations, as well as by the investors and executives who realize that a strong ESG proposition can safeguard a company's long-term success.

The weight of accumulated research finds that companies that pay attention to environmental, social, and governance concerns do not experience a drag on value creation. Better performance in ESG also corresponds with a

2 The stakeholder-minded approach is elaborated upon in Witold J. Henisz, Corporate Diplomacy: Why Firms Need to Build Ties with External Stakeholders (New York: Routledge, 2016); J. Browne, R. Nuttall, and T. Stadlen, Connect: How Companies Succeed by Engaging Radically with Society (New York: PublicAffairs, 2016); and C. Mayer, Prosperity: Better Business Makes the Greater Good (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2019).

 Global Sustainable Investment Review 2018, Global Sustainable Investment Alliance, 2018, www.gsi-alliance.org.

$^{4}$ W. J. Henisz and J. McGlinch, "ESG, Material Credit Events, and Credit Risk," Journal of Applied Corporate Finance 31 (July 2019): 105-117; M. Khan, G. Serafeim, and A. Yoon, "Corporate Sustainability: First Evidence on Materiality," Accounting Review 91, no. 6 (November 2016): 1697-1724; and Z. Nagy, A. Kassam, and L.-E. Lee, "Can ESG Add Alpha? An Analysis of ESG Tilt and Momentum Strategies," white paper, MSCI, June 2015, msci.com.

reduction in downside risk, as evidenced, among other ways, by lower loan and credit default swap spreads and higher credit ratings.[5]

In a 2019 McKinsey survey of 558 executives from around the globe and in different industries, 57 percent said they believe that ESG programs create shareholder value.6 While nearly all of the 57 percent said these programs create long-term value, two-thirds of them also reported that such programs create value in the short term. Among the major benefits driving value creation, according to respondents, are maintaining a good reputation and brand equity, attracting and maintaining talented employees, and strengthening the company's competitive position. Respondents across the spectrum also said they would be willing to pay a 10 percent premium for a company with a positive ESG record versus one with a negative record.

These favorable opinions do not mean that a company should undertake every ESG idea that comes along. Consistent with valuation principles, our point is that companies should take ESG considerations into account when they make important decisions and that companies should actively look for opportunities to invest in projects that have ESG benefits. Those who look actively may find more positive present value opportunities than they had expected. Where can they look for a strong ESG proposition that makes financial sense? ESG may link to cash flow in five important ways: (1) facilitating revenue growth, (2) reducing costs, (3) minimizing regulatory and legal interventions, (4) increasing employee productivity, and (5) optimizing investment and capital expenditures.

# Revenue Growth

A strong ESG proposition helps companies tap new markets and expand in existing ones. When governing authorities trust corporate actors, they are more likely to award them the access, approvals, and licenses that afford fresh

See, for example, S. A. Lundqvist and A. Vilhelmsson, "Enterprise Risk Management and Default Risk: Evidence from the Banking Industry," Journal of Risk and Insurance 85, no. 1 (March 2018), https:// onlinelibrary.wiley.com; E. Landry, M. Lazaro, and A. Lee, "Connecting ESG and Corporate Bond Performance," MIT Management Sloan School and Breckinridge Capital Advisors, 2017, mitsloan.mit.edu; and M. Reznick and M. Viehs, "Pricing ESG Risk in Credit Markets," Hermes Credit and Hermes EOS, 2017, hermes-investment.com. Similar benefits are found in yield spreads attached to loans; see A. Goss and G. S. Roberts, "The Impact of Corporate Social Responsibility on the Cost of Bank Loans," Journal of Banking and Finance 35, no. 7 (2011): 1794-1810, sciencedirect.com; S. Chava, "Environmental Externalities and Cost of Capital," Management Science 60, no. 9 (September 2014): 2111-2380; S. C. Bae, K. Chang, and H.-C. Yi, "The Impact of Corporate Social Responsibility Activities on Corporate Financing: A Case of Bank Loan Covenants," Applied Economics Letters 23, no. 17 (2016): 1234-1237; and S. C. Bae, K. Chang, H.-C. Yi, "Corporate Social Responsibility, Credit Rating, and Private Debt Contracting: New Evidence from Syndicated Loan Market," Review of Quantitative Finance and Accounting 50, no. 1 (2018): 261-299.

See L. Delevingne, A. Gründler, S. Kane, and T. Koller, "The ESG Premium: New Perspectives on Value and Performance," McKinsey on Finance 73 (January 2020), www.mckinsey.com.

opportunities for growth. For example, in a recent, massive public-private infrastructure project in Long Beach, California, the for-profit companies selected to participate were screened based on their prior performance in sustainability. Superior ESG execution has demonstrably paid off in mining as well. Consider gold, a commodity (albeit an expensive one) that should, all else being equal, generate the same returns for the companies that mine it regardless of their ESG propositions. Yet one major study found that companies with social engagement activities perceived to be beneficial by public and social stakeholders had an easier go at extracting those resources, without extensive planning or operational delays. These companies achieved demonstrably higher valuations than competitors with lower social capital.[7]

ESG can also drive consumer preference. McKinsey research has shown that customers say they are willing to pay to "go green." Although there can be wide discrepancies in practice, including customers who refuse to pay even 1 percent more, the researchers found that when consumers were surveyed on purchases in multiple industries, including the automotive, building, electronics, and packaging categories, upward of 70 percent said they would pay an additional 5 percent for a green product if it met the same performance standards as a nongreen alternative. In another study, nearly half (44 percent) of respondents identified business and growth opportunities as the impetus for their companies to start sustainability programs.

The payoffs are real. When Unilever developed Sunlight, a brand of dishwashing liquid that uses much less water than its other brands, sales of Sunlight and Unilever's other water-saving products proceeded to outpace category growth by more than 20 percent in a number of water-scarce markets. Procter & Gamble, too, is taking aim at developing an estimated  \$20 billion product line of detergents that are effective in cold water.$  And Finland's Neste, founded as a traditional petroleum-refining company more than 70 years ago, now generates more than two-thirds of its profits from renewable fuels and sustainability-related products.

# Cost Reductions

ESG can also reduce costs substantially. Among other advantages, executing ESG effectively can help combat rising operating expenses (such as raw materials costs and the true cost of water or carbon), which McKinsey research found can boost operating profits by as much as 60 percent. The researchers created a metric—the amount of energy use, water use, and waste created in relation to revenue—to analyze the relative resource efficiency of companies within various sectors. They found a significant correlation between resource efficiency and financial performance. The study also identified companies across sectors that did particularly well in terms of resource efficiency and financial performance—precisely the companies that had taken their sustainability strategies the furthest.

As with each of the five links to ESG value creation, the first step to realizing value begins with recognizing the opportunity. Consider 3M, which has long understood that being proactive about environmental risk can be a source of competitive advantage. The company has a program called "pollution prevention pays," which aims to prevent rather than clean up pollution; efforts have included reformulating products, improving manufacturing processes, redesigning equipment, and recycling and reusing waste from production. Since introducing the program in 1975, 3M has saved \$2.2 billion. Another enterprise, a major water utility, achieved cost savings of almost \$180 million per year through lean initiatives aimed at improving preventive maintenance, refining spare-parts inventory management, and tackling energy consumption and recovery from sludge. FedEx, for its part, aims to convert its entire 35,000-vehicle fleet to electric or hybrid engines. To date, 20 percent have been converted, which has already reduced fuel consumption by more than 50 million gallons.[9]

# Reduced Regulatory and Legal Interventions

A stronger external-value proposition can enable companies to achieve greater strategic freedom, easing regulatory pressure. In case after case, across sectors and geographies, we've seen that strength in ESG helps reduce companies' risk of adverse government action. It can also engender government support.

The value at stake may be higher than you think. Typically one-third of corporate profits are at risk from state intervention.[10] Regulation's impact, of course, varies by industry. For pharmaceuticals and health care, the profits at stake are about 25 to 30 percent. In banking, where provisions on capital requirements, "too big to fail" regulations, and consumer protection are so critical, the value at stake is typically 50 to 60 percent. For the automotive, aerospace and defense, and tech sectors, where government subsidies (among other forms of intervention) are prevalent, the value at stake can reach 60 percent as well.

# Employee Productivity Uplift

A strong ESG proposition can help companies attract and retain quality employees, enhance employee motivation by instilling a sense of purpose, and increase productivity overall. Employee satisfaction is positively correlated with shareholder returns.[11] For example, the London Business School's Alex Edmans found that the companies that made Fortune's list of the 100 Best Companies to Work For in America generated 2.3 to 3.8 percent higher stock returns per year than their peers, measured over a period of more than 25 years.[12] Moreover, it has long been observed that employees who report feeling not just satisfied but also connected perform better. The stronger an employee's perception of impact on the beneficiaries of their work, the greater the employee's motivation to act in a "prosocial" way.[13]

Recent studies have also shown that positive social impact correlates with higher job satisfaction, and field experiments suggest that when companies "give back," employees react with enthusiasm. For instance, randomly selected employees at one Australian bank who received bonuses in the form of company payments to local charities reported greater and more immediate job satisfaction than their colleagues who were not selected for the donation program.[14]

Just as a sense of higher purpose can inspire employees to perform better, a weaker ESG proposition can drag productivity down. The most glaring examples are strikes, worker slowdowns, and other labor actions within an organization. But it's worth remembering that productivity constraints can also manifest outside of a company's four walls, across the supply chain.[15] Primary suppliers often subcontract portions of large orders to other firms or rely on purchasing agents, and subcontractors are typically managed loosely, sometimes with little oversight regarding workers' health and safety.

 A. Edmans, "Does the Stock Market Fully Value Intangibles? Employee Satisfaction and Equity Prices," Journal of Financial Economics 101, no. 3 (September 2011): 621-640.

$^{12}$  A. Edmans, "The Link between Job Satisfaction and Firm Value, with Implications for Corporate Social Responsibility," Academy of Management Perspectives 26, no. 4 (November 2012): 1-19.

 A. M. Grant, "Does Intrinsic Motivation Fuel the Prosocial Fire? Motivational Synergy in Predicting Persistence, Performance, and Productivity," Journal of Applied Psychology 93, no. 1 (2008): 48-58; A. M. Grant, "Relational Job Design and the Motivation to Make a Prosocial Difference," Academy of Management Review 32, no. 2 (April 2007): 393-417; and J. S. Bunderson and J. A. Thompson, "Violations of Principle: Ideological Currency in the Psychological Contract," Academy of Management Review 28, no. 4 (2003): 571-586.

14 J.-E. De Neve et al., "Work and Well-Being: A Global Perspective," in *Global Happiness Policy Report*, ed. Global Council for Happiness and Wellbeing (New York: Sustainable Development Solutions Network, 2018).

15 A.-T. Bové and S. Swartz, "Starting at the Source: Sustainability in Supply Chains," McKinsey & Co., November 2016, www.mckinsey.com.

Farsighted companies pay heed. Consider General Mills, which works to ensure that its ESG principles apply "from farm to fork to landfill." Walmart, for its part, tracks the work conditions of its suppliers, including those with extensive factory floors in China, according to a proprietary company scorecard. And Mars seeks opportunities where it can deliver what it calls "win-win-wins" for the company, its suppliers, and the environment. Mars has developed model farms that not only introduce new technological initiatives to farmers in its supply chains, but also increase farmers' access to capital so they are able to obtain a financial stake in those initiatives.[16]

# Investment and Asset Optimization

A strong ESG proposition can enhance investment returns by allocating capital to more promising and more sustainable opportunities (for example, renewables, waste reduction, and scrubbers). It can also help companies avoid stranded investments that may not pay off because of longer-term environmental issues (such as massive write-downs in the value of oil tankers). Remember, taking proper account of investment returns requires that you start from the proper baseline. When it comes to ESG, it's important to bear in mind that a do-nothing approach is usually an eroding line, not a straight one. Continuing to rely on energy-hungry plants and equipment, for example, can drain cash going forward. While the investments required to update operations may be substantial, choosing to wait it out can be the most expensive option of all.

The rules of the game are shifting: regulatory responses to emissions will likely add to energy costs and could especially affect balance sheets in carbon-intensive industries. And bans or limitations on such things as single-use plastics or diesel-fueled cars in city centers will introduce new constraints on an immense number of businesses, many of which could find themselves having to play catch-up. One way to get ahead of the future curve is to consider repurposing assets right now—for instance, converting failing parking garages into uses with higher demand, such as residences or day-care facilities, a trend we're beginning to see in reviving cities.

Foresight flows to the bottom line, and riding sustainability's tailwinds presents new opportunities to enhance investment returns. "Consider China, for example. The country's imperative to combat air pollution is forecast to create more than 3 trillion in investment opportunities through 2030, ranging across industries from air-quality monitoring to indoor air purification and even cement mixing.

# DIGITAL INITIATIVES

The definition of digital is fuzzy. Some view it as simply the upgraded term for what their IT function does. Others focus on digital marketing and sales, providing digital services to customers, or connecting devices. The applications of digital technology in organizations involve all of these and probably ideas that haven't been thought of yet. Several of our colleagues examined a typical consumer packaged-goods company to see how many ways digitization and digital applications could be used to improve performance. They identified at least 33 possibilities, including digital marketing, optimizing trade spending, improving sales force coverage, predictive maintenance, supply chain planning, and robotic process automation in the back office.

Given the wide scope of potential digital initiatives, it is no surprise that most companies are launching them. In a 2018 survey of 1,733 managers, about eight in ten said their organizations had begun a digital transformation. However, just 14 percent said their efforts had made and sustained performance improvements. What's more, only 3 percent reported complete success at sustaining their change.[17] Evidently, digital is an area where management discipline is much needed.

# Measuring the Value of Digitization

It's not surprising that companies struggle with how to evaluate the myriad "digital" initiatives being proposed. Yet the fundamental principle still applies: evaluate digital projects based on the cash flow they are expected to generate. While it sounds simple, getting it right requires some thoughtful strategic analysis.

Ideally, all investment decisions should be analyzed against an alternative course of action. For digital projects, the alternative may be to do nothing. But the do-nothing case doesn't mean zero cash flows. In fact, the do-nothing or business-as-usual case is often the key to evaluating digital projects.

Banks have faced this challenge several times over the past 40 years. In the 1970s and 1980s, banks introduced automated teller machines. In the 2000s, banks set up online banking. In the 2010s, banks developed mobile-banking apps. It seems obvious that banks needed to introduce all these innovations. But these innovations probably didn't generate new revenues, because customers expected them. Thus, although a mobile-banking app makes strategic sense, it appears to create a negative present value due to its additional costs with no added revenues.

Here's where the importance of the base case comes in. If the bank doesn't build a mobile app, it will likely lose market share and revenues over time. In this case, the cash inflows are the avoidance of lost revenues, which could be substantial. So this project likely does have a positive present value.

Ideally, the bank would estimate the timing of market-share loss to decide on the best time to build the app. Perhaps delaying a year or two might maximize value if the bank's customer base isn't clamoring for it yet. The bank should also consider alternative features for the app and ways to build it. Should it start with something simple and low cost to roll out and then improve it over time? Or should it spend more up front on a more feature-laden product? As you can see, there are many different cash flow scenarios to analyze when making this decision.

# Paths to Improved Performance

Digital initiatives can improve a company's performance in numerous ways. To analyze the potential impact of digital, it helps to frame the discussion as two opportunities or threats. The first—and the highest-profile manifestation of digital in the business press—is an application of digital tools that fundamentally disrupts an industry, requiring a major revamp of a company's business model.

The second kind of impact, less dramatic but also important, occurs when companies use digital to simply do the things they already do, only better. Digital strategies can be applied in more mundane but also important ways including cost reduction, improved customer experience, new revenue sources, and better decision making. The line between the two applications can blur, such as when clothing retailers integrate their physical and online sales. The retailer is still selling clothes, but the customer's experience has changed, and the retailer must substantially retool its business.

New Business Models In some cases, digital disruption upends entire business models or creates entirely new businesses. The Internet changed the way consumers research and purchase airline tickets and hotel rooms, disintermediating many traditional travel agents. The introduction of video-streaming services has disrupted the economics of traditional broadcast and cable TV channels. In some cases, digital has created enormous new businesses. Cloud computing services generated between  \$80 billion and\$ 100 billion of revenues in 2019, up from less than 10 billion ten years earlier. The rise of cloud computing disrupted two other industries. First, the standardization of servers by leading players disrupted the manufacturers of mainframe and server computers. Second, it disrupted the IT services business that ran companies' data centers.

To value these new businesses, use the standard DCF approach. The fact that these businesses are often growing fast and don't earn profits early on does not affect the valuation approach. Eventually, they will need to generate profits and cash flow and earn an attractive ROIC. In Chapter 36, we describe how to value high-growth companies. The key point is that with high-growth companies, you must start in the future to estimate revenues when the market begins to stabilize, based on the market's potential size. You should estimate ROIC based on an assessment of the fundamental economics of the business.

An important consideration in estimating the potential size and ROIC of a new digital business is whether or not it will have network effects, also called increasing returns to scale. The basic idea is this: in certain situations, as companies grow, they can earn higher margins and return on capital because their product becomes more valuable with each new customer. In most industries, competition forces returns back to reasonable levels. But in industries with network effects, competition is kept at bay by the low and decreasing unit costs of the market leader (hence the tag "winner take all" for this kind of industry).

Take Microsoft's Office software, a product that provides word processing, spreadsheets, and graphics. Office has long been the standard used by most companies and other users. Early on, as the installed base of Office users expanded, it became ever more attractive for new customers to use Office for these tasks, because they could share documents, calculations, and images with so many others. As the customer base grew, margins were very high, because the incremental cost of providing software through DVD or download was so low. Office is one of the most profitable products of all time. That said, even such a successful product may be threatened by competition as more computing moves to the cloud.

Such network effects are not the usual case. The history of innovation shows how difficult it is to earn monopoly-size returns on capital for any length of time except in very special circumstances. Many companies and investors didn't realize how rare this was during the dot-com bubble of 1999-2000. More recently, investors again may have gone overboard with the number of "unicorns," typically defined as start-up companies with values above 1 billion (usually still private) and negative profits. In 2019, as some unicorns went public or tried to, there was a renewed realization that not all these companies could earn extraordinary returns from network effects, and values fell considerably. It's unlikely that companies offering analytics services, selling e-cigarettes, or renting out short-term office space will achieve long-term network effects.

Cost Reduction Many digital initiatives can help companies reduce their operating costs. Predictive maintenance on factory equipment reduces both maintenance costs and lost production from downtime. Another example is the grandly named robotic process automation (RBA). This doesn't refer to physical robots, but rather to software that automates processes like accounts/payable processing. As these robots become more sophisticated, they can take on even more difficult tasks, handling exceptions in addition to plain-vanilla accounts payable.

Some examples show great progress for this kind of cost reduction. One mining company saved over 360 million per year from process automation in the field that gave managers more insight into what exactly was happening, enabling managers to make adjustments and anticipate needed ones. Fossil-fuel power generators have improved a plant's heat rate (how efficiently the plant uses fuel) by up to 3 percent by using sensors and actuators for remote monitoring and automated operations, as well as employing smart valves that self-report and repair leakages. They've also used automated work-order generation, remote expert support using virtual-reality devices, and automated warehouses to reduce operating costs by 5 to 20 percent. At the same time, they have improved safety by using robots for tasks in confined spaces, as well as advanced analytics to prevent accidents due to fatigue or distraction.[18]

Understanding the economics of cost reduction is not as straightforward as it may seem. You might be tempted to estimate the present value by simply discounting the expected savings and subtracting the investments required. But you also must examine the second-order effects. Are your competitors pursuing the same initiatives? In a competitive industry like the chemicals business, those cost reductions might simply be passed through to customers as price reductions. Chemical companies typically find ways to reduce costs by around 2 percent per year, but their margins don't increase, because industry players pass the savings on to customers.

In a situation like this, where the present value of cost reduction efforts is zero because the savings are passed on to customers, the alternative case becomes important. If your competitors are pursuing digital initiatives to reduce costs and you are not, you'll still have to reduce your prices in line with your competitors'. The alternative to the digital initiative would be a decline in cash flows due to lower prices without reduced costs. So the present value of the initiative may turn positive again, once you compare your initiative to the right base case. In practice, whether the savings are passed on to customers will vary by industry, but it's critical to think carefully through the alternative case.

Improved Customer Experience Consumers have benefited tremendously from the digital actions of companies serving them. Many retailers have become "omnichannel," giving consumers a high degree of flexibility. Consumers can purchase an item of clothing in a store or online, to be shipped to the buyer's home or to a local store. If the local store doesn't have the right size for an in-store shopper, the customer can order it on the spot and have it delivered to the customer's home. A customer who decides to return an item can return it to any store or mail it back, regardless of how it was purchased. Consumers can also track in real time the progress of shipments heading their way.

Using digitization to improve customer experience can add value to the business in a variety of ways. One leading manufacturer of agricultural products was struggling with low customer satisfaction scores and an erosion of its customer base. Using digital solutions, the company created a seamless online process for ordering, tracking, and query management. This increased the company's customer satisfaction score by 24 percentage points and improved throughput by 20 percent.[19] In some cases, improved customer service also reduces costs. An electricity distribution company fully redesigned its customer interfaces in a "digital-first" way that made a priority of the customer's online interaction. Customer satisfaction rose 25 percentage points, employee satisfaction increased by 10 percentage points, and customer service costs fell 40 percent.

As is the case with applying digital solutions to reduce costs, it's critical to think through the competitive effects of investing in digital to gain a superior customer experience. Recall our earlier example of the mobile-banking app. The value proposition boils down to cash flow, but special considerations emerge. Does the improved customer service lead to higher market share because your customer service is better than that of your competitors? Or does it maintain your market share or avoid losing market share because your competitors are doing the same thing?

In many situations, customers have come to expect an improved customer experience and are unwilling to pay extra for it. In the case of omnichannel retailers, today's customers routinely expect seamless transactions across channels from many retailers, but for the retailers, providing omnichannel services is expensive. The cost to ship online orders often makes these sales unprofitable, while in-store sales may be declining, leading to lower margins, as some costs are fixed. Even so, retailers have no choice but to provide the omnichannel services despite lower profitability. If they don't, they'll lose even more revenues and profits.

New Revenue Sources Some companies have been able to create new revenue sources through digital initiatives. In these cases, the economic analysis versus the base case is more straightforward, because at least for a while, you (and maybe your competitors) are making the pie bigger for the whole industry. However, genuinely new revenue sources can be hard to find and difficult to convince customers to pay for.

Imagine you are sitting at home with an urge for some ice cream but don't want to go out to the local convenience store. Ben & Jerry's in the United Kingdom has set up centralized ice-cream freezers where a delivery company picks up the ice cream and delivers it to the customer within a short time period. These centralized freezers generate ten times the volume of convenience store freezers—mostly additional sales, because without the convenient delivery, many customers would simply skip the ice cream.

Or consider farm equipment manufacturer John Deere's introduction of precision farming services. The company has created a data-driven service business that collects soil samples and analyzes weather patterns to help farmers optimize crop yields. Sensors in tractors and other machinery provide data for predictive maintenance, automated sprinkler systems synchronize with weather data, and an open-software platform lets third parties build new service apps.[20]

Then there's one transportation company's digital solution to help its customers improve fleet maintenance. That solution helped generate more than 10 million of additional revenue through software subscriptions and aftermarket parts sales.[21]

These new revenue sources can create value because they don't involve just keeping up with the competition. In two of the examples, digital innovations created an overall increase in the revenue pool for the industry. In Ben & Jerry's case, the overall consumption of ice cream increased. In John Deere's case, a new product offering also increased overall demand.

Better Decision Making Finally, some executives are pairing the trove of data being generated and new advanced analytics techniques to enable managers to make better decisions about a broad range of activities, including how they fund marketing, utilize assets, and retain customers.

Consider two examples. A maker of high-tech hardware implemented a partially automated solution to improve pricing for thousands of product configurations. Key features included configuration-based price benchmarking, analysis of price trends, and automated pricing recommendations with weekly updates of up to 200,000 price points for up to 20,000 products. A consumer products company used advanced analytics to improve the design of its planograms. A planogram is a model of how a consumer packaged-goods company allocates its limited space on retail shelves. It describes which products will be included and how to display them. Analytics showed decision makers at the company that they could dramatically improve effectiveness. At the same time, they reduced the number of people required to design planograms from ten to just two.

Advanced analytics to improve decision making can generate additional revenues, reduce costs, or both. In the planogram example, the improvement can increase total customer spending by getting customers to upgrade to more profitable products. In this case, because the change involves only choices within the company's product mix, the improvement can create value without necessarily inviting a competitive response. In other cases, the benefits may be diluted because competitors take similar actions, but the investment in analytics still may create value by maintaining competitive parity.

# CLOSING THOUGHTS

As executives and investors alike grapple with understanding the impact on business value of emerging environmental, social, and governance issues, as well as the competitive implications of digital technologies in all their forms, it bears remembering that these topics and the management responses to them will likely be fluid for some time to come. Still, as new as these topics may seem, existing valuation principles can help with framing initial responses and surfacing techniques for dealing with such challenges as they evolve. Companies will also do well if they concentrate on the specific areas that will have the greatest impact on the factors that create value.
